   (BUTTON) Reveal Search Form (BUTTON) Reveal Off-canvas Navigation

Why Geek is the New Cool

   By Michael Poh in Culture. Updated on November 21, 2021.

   Not too long ago, geeks, or in better terms, the intellectual computer
   and technology enthusiast, are pretty much undesirable people among
   their peers. You see them with their trademark large black-rimmed
--
   socializing.

   Then all of a sudden, geeks become cool. They are now admired by their
   peers for their superior intellectuality despite their perceived lack
   of sociability. Now we see the rise of ‘geek chic’ as celebrities like
   Justin Timberlake donned geeky fashion clothing and the inseparable
   geeky specs. Geeks like Microsoft’s Bill Gates, Facebook’s Mark
   Zuckerberg and Apple’s Steve Jobs are now immensely rich, famous, and
   most importantly, worshiped by everyone else for their innovations.

   The world starts embracing the geek culture. Video games are more
   popular than ever, and discussions about how to beat the bosses in
   these games are no longer taboo. Technology like iPhone, Facebook and
--
   Wow. So, what actually happened in a span of simply a few decades?

Internet: Savior of the Geeks

   If water is what gives Earth life, then Internet must be what keeps the
--
   such convenience. Those who do not use the internet get cuts off from
   the rest of the world. And guess who lay the path for how the internet
   develops? Geeks.

   mark zuckerberg mark zuckerberg

   Possessing first-hand knowledge on how technology and computer works
   gave geeks a head-start when internet first surfaced. They were the
   pioneers when it comes to adapting to new innovations, given that their
   passion and capabilities spur them to quickly learn whatever that came
--
   be amazed at how it came to become what it is today. From e-mails to
   chat messenger, from Web 1.0 to 2.0, from forums to social networking
   sites; the possibilities are limitless. When geeks were in such an
   influential position on setting what will become of one of the world’s
   greatest inventions, they became powerful people.
--
   Today, as we anticipate how the future of the internet or any other
   technology will be charted out, everything is pretty much under the
   discretion of these so-called geeks. They have the ability to create
   innovations that could revolutionize the world, just as how the
   Microsoft Windows operating system had monopolized and change the way
   people perceive computer system to be.

   What can be cooler than being that geek who has such authority and
   expertise to shape the world?

Geeks Against the World

   In some ways, geeks are rebels against the world. We see it in Shawn
   Fanning, founder of the infamous Napster, protesting against the music
   industry for charging for music, and open-source software Linux warring
--
   bill gates bill gates (Image Source: Microsoft)

   Even on a personal level, these geeks are considered non-conformist.
   They may not seem smart to people who base intelligence on educational
   qualifications, but no one can deny their achievements. Both Bill Gates
--
   The more you know about how something works, the better you will
   utilize it. If you know how the world works, wouldn’t you have an edge
   over everyone else? This is how it is with geeks. The world today is
   technology-saturated, and they are the technology and computer
   enthusiast who can understand and use it best.

   The more the world is moving towards a dependence on information, the
   more revered these geeks are relied upon to deliver the knowledge. So
   you see, the geeks hold an important status in our society because we
   would eventually be unable to function without their guidance.

   Any more doubts that geeks are the new cool? Not anymore.

Join The Kingdom of Geek

   You don’t need to understand either C, C++, C# or Objective-C to become
   a geek, here are some quality posts aiding you to understand and become
   a geek, at least from the perspective of physical belongings.
     * Awesome Gifts for Geeks
     * Geek: 80+ T-Shirts You can Buy Online

   Show Comments
