   #Why Do Nerds Become Successful CEOs? - RSS

   Subscribe
--
   Small Business Strategy

Why Do Nerds Become Successful CEOs?

   Gene Marks
--
   My son is halfway through his freshman year at college and is trying to
   decide on a major. He asked me over Christmas break for some advice. To
   me, it’s an easy choice. “Be a nerd,” I told him. “Be a nerd.”

   Satya Nadella was named CEO of Microsoft last week. Nadella has an
--
   executive VP of their cloud and enterprise group.

   In other words, he’s a nerd. Oh, and did I mention he’s also a big fan
   of cricket? Definitely a nerd. And now he’s the CEO of Microsoft. Of
   all the people in the world, Microsoft chose a nerd to be its boss.

   Star Trek Magazine Poster Book, Voyage Three, Star Date 7611.01 (1976)
   (Photo credit: France1978)

   Nadella joins a long list of nerds running technology companies, big
   and small. People like Mark Zuckerberg, Tim Cook, and Larry Page. Dick
   Costolo, the CEO of Twitter graduated with degrees in computer and
   communication sciences before trying out his hand at comedy, a very
   nerd-like thing to do. Yahoo's Marissa Mayer graduated Stanford with a
   B.S. in symbolic systems (what the hell is that?) and an M.S. in
   computer science where her specialization was in artificial
   intelligence. And if that isn’t nerdy enough, Mayer reportedly dated
   Larry Page at one time.

--
   computer science. Oh, and while he was at Princeton, he also served as
   the President of the Princeton chapter of the Students for the
   Exploration and Development of Space. Now that’s some scary nerd stuff.
   And don’t believe for a minute that Larry Ellison, the manly-man CEO at
   Oracle isn’t a nerd – the guy was a computer design specialist, even
   though he never graduated from college.

--
   Whitman, for example, grew up in the world of marketing and brand
   management. Steve Ballmer took the business route too. But for the most
   part it’s the nerds who rule technology companies. Scientists.
   Engineers. Biologists. And if they have a little bit of business sense
   then all the better.
--
   basket. The typical marketing, accounting or management degree that
   takes the average student four years to complete at state college would
   take a smart nerd half the amount of time. It’s just math. In fact, for
   the most part business is pretty simple math. Especially when you
   compare it to the math and logic the nerds do in their engineering,
   physics and computer science programs.

   If you run a technology company you will do better if you are a nerd.
   If you are investing in a technology company you will have more chance
   of success if a nerd is leading it. I recently asked Sean Flynn, a
   partner at Shasta Ventures about Swipely, one of their investments.

--
   worked his way up in the world developing websites and products for
   companies like Netscape. I’ve never met or spoken to Davis, but he also
   seems kind of nerdy to me. And Flynn loves that.  “It’s not just the
   idea for a company,” Flynn told me. “It’s the person running the
   company. We love Angus and that’s why we invested.” Another victory for
   another nerd.

   Successful technology companies are generally run by nerds. I could
   argue that nerds, being more technical, also have more vision and
   relevance in a more technical world. And that is true. But more
   importantly if you are a nerd running a company than you will be
   respected by the other nerds who just want to do nerdy things and are
   happy to let you be the boss because you’re a nerd like them. You will
   be able to speak their language and understand their problems. You will
   know better how to manage their time and create expectations. You can
--

   You can always hire business people to do your accounting and finance.
   You can always find salesmen to sell your products (and those nerds
   with a smidgen of communication skills excel better there too). People
   who get technical degrees in college and can develop the skills to
   socialize, speak to groups and better understand other people are the
   ones who often emerge as leaders of tech companies. Of course, they
   will always be nerds at heart. Just ask Nadella. Cricket? Ugh.

   Besides Forbes, Gene Marks writes daily for The New York Times and
