   ✕

Geeks vs. Jocks: How Geeks are Winning the War of Public Opinion

   Fifty-seven percent of Americans believe being called a geek is a
   compliment.
   By
--
   May 25, 2011, 12:10 PM ET
   • 3 min read
   The Conversation: Celebrating Your Inner GeekABC's John Berman
   celebrates International Geek Pride Day with geek experts.

   May 25, 2011 -- It is a rivalry that has stood the test of time,
   tortured many a high school souls and become an iconic battle in U.S.
   culture: jocks vs. geeks. Today, on International Geek Pride Day, a new
   survey reveals that geeks are winning the public opinion war.

   Fifty-seven percent of Americans say being called a geek is a
   compliment and more Americans would prefer to be called a geek rather
   than a jock, according to a new survey by Modis.

   "People have gone from the vision of the movies 'Revenge of the Nerds'
   and that was what geeks would be associated with being, to Bill Gates,
   Steve Jobs, considered pretty cool people," said Jack Cullen, president
   of Modis, a provider of information technology staffing. "I point a lot
--

   The survey also reveals that Americans closely associate the word
   "geek" with positive attributes such as intelligence and an expertise
   in technology.

   Despite the good will, however, there is a generational divide.
   Sixty-six percent of those 18 to 34 consider being identified as a
   "geek" a compliment, while only 39 percent of those 65 and older agree.

   "The association was if you're technically savvy and you're really into
--
   room."

   The atmosphere for geeks in America is changing overall. The vast
   majority, 82 percent of people, believe it is more acceptable to be a
   geek today than it was 15 years ago.

   But whatever you do, don't get geeks and nerds confused. The survey
   showed that people do not see the words synonymously. Self-identified
   geeks make up 17 percent of Americans and 87 percent of those who
   self-identified as a geek prefer the term over nerd.

   "Being geek signifies intelligence and coolness," Cullen told ABC News.
   "In the old days it always stood for intelligence, but intelligence
   wasn't always that important and I think there's also a different level
--
   but how the perceptions of people have changed as well."

   Geeks by the Numbers:

   [img_bullet_bluedot.gif] 57 percent of Americans consider being called
   a geek a compliment.

   [img_bullet_bluedot.gif] 44 percent of Americans would prefer to be
   called a geek.

   [img_bullet_bluedot.gif] 22 percent of Americans would prefer to be
--

   [img_bullet_bluedot.gif] 66 percent of respondents aged 18 to 34
   consider being identified as a geek a compliment.

   [img_bullet_bluedot.gif] 39 percent of respondents 65 and older
   consider being identified as a geek a compliment.

   [img_bullet_bluedot.gif] 17 percent of Americans self-identify as a
   geek.

   [img_bullet_bluedot.gif] 82 percent of Americans say they believe it is
   more acceptable to be a geek today than it was 15 years ago.

   Opinion Research Corp. surveyed 1,000 U.S. adults 18 and older May 4 to
