   #English Language Learners Stack Exchange Feed for question 'Is it good
   to call someone "Nerd"?'

Stack Exchange Network
--
   Learn more about Teams

Is it good to call someone "Nerd"?

   Ask Question
--
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   My friends always use "nerd" to describe an intelligent person, but
   when I searched its meaning online, I found that it's not really a good
   word.
--
   6
     * 3
       How much research have you done? Nerd has another meaning.
       – Mick
       Oct 27, 2016 at 17:04
--
       – marsh
       Oct 27, 2016 at 21:46
     * Context and intent are both important here; "nerd" can be an
       insult, a compliment or somewhat "neutral".
       – Shaggy
--
   Example,

     I'm a real grammar nerd.

   So, no it is not in the bad or negative sense but you still have to be
   careful with this word some people might find a bit offensive to be
   called a "nerd" especially when this word has a first definition that
   is kind of negative.
   Share
--
       careful qualification. For example, "You like sitting up late at
       night debating the merits of descriptivism? You're my kind of
       nerd!" would be OK, but "You're such a nerd!" without any
       additional context might (still) be taken as something of an
       insult.
       – 1006a
       Oct 27, 2016 at 20:16
     * This may be local to my area/social circles, but oftentimes "nerd"
       is used as a term of endearment used with your closer friends. E.g.
       Saying "What's going on, nerds?" when greeting a group of friends.
       I personally haven't heard it used negatively since I watched
       Revenge of the Nerds in middle school (early 2000s).
       – user43841
       Oct 27, 2016 at 20:18
--
     * 1
       @Pants: that's almost certainly local to your area, because to my
       ears (as a self-confessed nerd on many topics), it sounds really
       weird to refer to your friends collectively as "nerds" in the
       example you gave.
       – flith
--
   insults to become a "badge of honour" for the insulted group.

   In my personal experience, nerd was an insult most (~ 90%) of the time
   until the mid-late 2000s, when the concept of a "nerd culture" became
   surprisingly popular. Of course, nerd as "person who follows nerd
   culture" and nerd as "person who studies too much" do not always
   overlap.
   Share
--
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   I don't agree nerd is restricted to intelligent.

   A nerd can use the n word to describe themselves but other people
   should not.

   A nerd can say he is a nerd pack like me.

   As a non nerd there are so many ways to express without using the n
   word. He/she is into computing. He is a car racing enthusiast. All she
   can talk about is medicine.

   He is cryptography nerd from MIT that works for the NSA is OK.

   It clearly does not have the strict negative connotation of the other n
--
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   In some language communities, "nerd" is a loaded word; for example,
   when used to describe a boy or man, nerd can carry connotations of
   being easy to push around and/or sexually frustrated. In some language
   communities, it's basically considered inoffensive; but unless you want
--
   parliamentary MP one day, or become the CEO of a major corporation, or
   end up owning a large and highly successful business, etc. Such a woman
   may not appreciate being called a "nerd", I think.
   Share
   Improve this answer
--
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   A nerd is someone with a drive to study. The driver can exist for any
   of a bunch of different reasons. There are also different areas of
   focus. Eventually, though, a nerd, in order to be a nerd, must have a
   certain "love of the subject".

   And then there are shy nerds, who will cringe upon hearing the word,
   and less shy nerds, who will openly affirm, part of their identity, as
   a nerd.

   For a reference and idea, please see the movie T.G.I.F by Katy Perry,
   which might be able to give you some ideas about why one would be, or
   want to be, or end up being, a nerd.
   Share
   Improve this answer
