     * News and events
     * May
          + 5 reasons why being a geek is cool

   University home
--
     * May
     * 25
          + 5 reasons why being a geek is cool

   News_

   5 reasons why being a geek is cool
   25 May 2018
   It really is hip to be square
   Share
   The worldwide celebration of nerdom is in full swing to commemorate
   international Geek Pride Day (that’s 25 May for those not ‘in the
   know’).
   [cq5dam.web.1280.1280.jpeg]

   Allegedly selected to honour the release of Star Wars IV: A New Hope
   (25 May 1977), Geek Pride Day is the brainchild of Spanish blogger
   Germán Martínez, who instigated the inaugural festivities to celebrate
   all things geek in 2006.

   Since then, the annual initiative has grown and been adopted the world
--
   To honour the day, here are five amazing, incredible and uncanny
   byte-sized (yes, the pun is intentional) examples about why being a
   geek is cool.

Geeks created the new social norms

   Microsoft’s Bill Gates, Google’s Sergey Brin and Larry Page, and
   Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg are all geeks who revolutionised the way
   people interact with each other.

--
   peers).

Geeks are the new handy people

   Computers, tablets, smartphones – nearly every facet of society is
--
   devices let us down (or when we have no idea how to use them)?

   Geeks are now the new ‘go to’ people, solving and soldering these
   technical problems when they breakdown to keep business and social
   lives running. To avoid being further embarrassed by your inferiority
--
   “switch it off and switched it back on”.

Geeks are good at trivia

   Nerds know a lot of things. Lots and lots of things. It's why they're
--
   smallest moon (Deimos) or even the Konami Code (up, up, down, down,
   left, right, left, right, B, A), there is no question that can stump a
   bonafide geek.

Geeks make the future possible

   What do Pythagoras, Isaac Newton and John Bradfield all have in common?
   They’re all examples of historical geeks who followed their passions
   while overcoming criticism (and built proverbial bridges, one
   literally) in order to fulfil their vision to improve society.

Geeks have their very own code of ethics

   As every geek’s honourary Uncle Ben once touted, “With great power
   comes great responsibility”.

   Originally known as the Decálogo de derechos y deberes del friki in
   Spanish, the following manifesto is what all geeks are bound by:

Rights

   1. The right to be even geekier.

   2. The right to not leave your house.
--
   5. The right to have few friends (or none at all).

   6. The right to have as many geeky friends as you want.

   7. The right to choose one’s own style.
--
   8. The right to be overweight and near-sighted.

   9. The right to show off your geekiness.

   10. The right to attempt being as geeky as Morgana Summers, and the
   right to fail. (Topher Stumph came quite close, but he too failed).

--

   13. The right to execute shameless self-promotion via the Wikipedia
   Geek Pride Day page. (See #10).

   14. The right to falsely assume the surnames Finkleton, Waldman,
--
Responsibilities

   1. Be a geek, no matter what.

   2. Try to be nerdier than anyone else.

   3. If there is a discussion about something geeky, you must give your
   opinion.

   4. To save and protect all geeky material.

   5. Do everything you can to show off geeky stuff as a "museum of
   geekiness".

   6. Don't be a generalised geek. You must specialize in something.

   7. Attend every nerdy movie on opening night and buy every geeky book
   before anyone else.

--
   least with a related T-shirt, all the better.

   9. Don't waste your time on anything not related to geekdom.

   10. Befriend any person or persons bearing any physical similarities to
