     * Psychotherapy

Highly Intelligent But Socially Handicapped: The Psychology Of The Nerd

   Ask Dr. Dombeck
--

   Your son is a member of a social class often described in colloquial
   terms as nerds. I mean no insult by using this term! I use it in the
   sense of the second of the Answers.Com definitions for the term:

--
     technical pursuits but is felt to be socially inept.

   Meant in this way, the term nerd has utility. It allows us to talk in
   general terms about a group of individual who have similar social
   awkwardness issues. Since I can’t think of a better term to use to
   describe such individuals, let’s talk about the psychology of the nerd.

Therapists are Standing By to Treat Your Depression, Anxiety or Other Mental
--
   Explore Your Options Today

   Nerdiness exists on a continuum. Some people are a little nerdy, while
   others are very nerdy. The more nerdy you get, the more you tend to be
   oblivious of yourself as a social object and to behave in socially
   awkward ways such as dressing badly or failing to take subtle hints.
   Nerdiness is developmental in some fashion. It tends to come on early
   on in life. People grow out of being nerds; they don’t become nerds in
   later life.

   Because nerds are awkward and un-smooth, they tend to be rejected and
   isolated by peers, and because it is emotionally painful to experience
   such marginalization, they tend to push themselves to be excellent in
   aspects of life that do not require social skills. If they are at all
   smart, they tend to go whole hog into some intellectual pursuit.
   Computer science is a big one for many nerds (or that subspecies of
   nerd who proudly call themselves "geek"), but any non-social
   intellectual pursuit will do. Chemistry fits the profile as would most
   any academic pursuit. The strategy at work is a variation on the theme
   of making a weakness into a virtue. Nerds can become very good at their
   chosen fields because they have very little to keep them from devoting
   all of their energy to those fields. These are not balanced people with
--
   papers. I know this because I used to be one of these people.

   The big lie that a nerd tells him or herself is that they will make a
   satisfying life for themselves based purely on their intellectual
   pursuits. For some minority of nerds, this may be possible, but I think
   for many others, the "life of the mind" becomes excruciatingly lonely
   after a while. The problem is though that by the time such people
--
   project and retreat back to the ivory tower where they stay until the
   next time they get lonely. The other academicians around you sharing
   office space in the tower are by and large also nerds and also socially
   awkward and so they can’t help much. They are good for mutually
   reinforcing the idea of how great it is to work on the chosen field,
--

   I don’t think anyone has developed a comprehensive theory of what
   causes people to become nerds, but any such theory will have to take
   the following concepts into account if it is ever written.

   Some people’s nerdiness is a function of a condition called Asperger’s
   Disorder which is a mild pervasive developmental disorder on the same
   spectrum as Autism. We’ve got a very comprehensive article about Autism
--
   reasonable portrayal.

   An alternative kind of nerd is someone who develops a condition known
   as Schizotypal Personality Disorder. To say someone has a personality
   disorder in general is to say that they have grown up with some
--

   Having a diagnosable disorder such as Asperger’s or Schizotypal PD
   might qualify a person as a nerd or a geek in some circles, but the
   reverse is not true. There are many nerds who don’t qualify for any
   diagnosable disorder. They may be the way they are for other reasons.
   One primary reason that could push a person towards nerdiness is the
   presence of simple but profound social anxiety. Social skills are
   learned through interaction with other children and adults during
--
   compounded. Not being a member of intimate relationships means you are
   cut off from important feedback such as how to dress appropriately or
   when it is not good form to wear a backpack. The true nerd will
   rationalize his or her odd social behavior, I think for defensive
   purposes. It is simply very painful to admit to yourself that you are
--
     * Wanting A Better Life
     * Highly Intelligent But Socially Handicapped: The Psychology Of The
       Nerd
     * 20 Year Old Female: No Friends, Depressed, What Should I Do?
     * Worried About Thoughts
