   FacebookTwitterSubscribe

   whyeverystudentshouldbeanerd-c whyeverystudentshouldbeanerd-c

Why Every Student Should Be A Nerd

   By Terry Heick

   As a kid, I never thought of myself as a ‘nerd.’

   For one, ‘nerd’ isn’t something you strived to be in the 1980s and
   1990s. (Remember the movie “Revenge of the Nerds?)

   I did what was (then) normal stuff–played sports, rode my bike,
--
   to keep from reading most of the time. I did play video games, but
   while I never managed to be ‘cool’, that was as dangerously close as I
   got to the social stigma of being branded a nerd. (Probably.)

   But times have changed. A technology-obsessed culture has reinvigorated
   terms like ‘nerd’ and ‘geek’, to several effects. Tech is often
   complex, and is also mainstream. This is a convenient ‘in’ for nerds,
   growing the population of voluntary participants in these longstanding
   sociological genres.

   Put briefly, nerds have historically valued knowing over seeming–ideas
   over conformity, and in the 20-teens, ideas are more valuable than
   ever. Because of technology and that platforms it has enabled, the
--

   And is what I do. I help educators think about learning. That’s pretty
   nerdy. I spend a large part of my time on social media but not in a
   cool or personal way–I don’t have the time to do that because I have
   too much else to do. I email. I listen to podcasts and read and read
--

   I talk about ideas, often on a computer, with other people who have
   ideas too. That’s what nerds do.1

   Today, nerds have all of the potential. Following and adhering and
   conforming are currencies less valuable in comparison.

   Nerds read. A lot. Often books, but also blogs and social streams. So
   do a lot of people, I guess, but they don’t just read, they read with a
   purpose.

   Nerds also gather–reddit, for example, is full of them. They categorize
   themselves into smaller communities called subreddits, and moderate
   themselves out of love for that topic the said subbredit is built
   around.

   Nerds do things because they’re fascinated by them.

   Nerds seek to counter the mainstream not out of a sense of rebellion,
   but because the mainstream is where good ideas go to die.

   Nerds design things. Bridges, avionics, poems, apps, wearable
   technology, media channels, electric cars, and all the other ideas the
   cool kids end up adopting.

   Nerds love concepts. They wear t-shirts with ideas on them.

   Nerds like games. They gather as adults and play them together–and not
   just athletic games, but board games, video games.

   Nerds don’t necessarily love school either, nor do they have to get
   ‘straight A’s.’ That’s not a nerd, that’s a very successful (and
   probably compliant) student. A nerd can get straight A’s, but they do
   so because being successful academically is something they want to do.

   More than anything else, nerds risk ridicule in pursuit of
   realization–of ideas, dreams, and more. As a society we are less and
   less tolerant of bullying, name-calling, and other forms of public
   shaming, which means that calling someone a ‘nerd’ today is less
   acceptable than in the past–which is good.

--
   would do well to seek to produce.

   Why Every Student Should Be A Nerd

   Post navigation
