   #Being A Geek: What It Really Means About You And 5 Ways To Leverage It
   - RSS

--
   Careers

Being A Geek: What It Really Means About You And 5 Ways To Leverage It

   David Sturt and Todd Nordstrom
--
     * Share to Linkedin

   Being a geek used to create images of social misfits, and less than
   attractive personalities. But,... [+] not anymore. Credit:Shutterstock

   Geeks—the two of us might fit the profile. Yes we have tendencies to
   contemplate things that probably shouldn’t be contemplated. We
   question. We prod. We poke…at everything. And, we’ve been known to
--
   like: “Is the love of curry a genetic disposition or a socially
   experiential acquisition?” Or, what is the real meaning of the word
   “of?” That’s a valid question, right? Or, is it just geeky?

   Being geeky, according to research by Imgur, is actually cool in
   today’s world—especially among Millennials. In fact, 60% of the 83
   million Millennials consider themselves geeks compared to just 38% of
   GenXers and Boomers. And, the study also shows that geeks are the
   trendsetters and influencers (84% of geeks say people look to them for
   advice while only 60% of non-geeks say they get asked for advice).

   This is, of course, welcome news for all of us who happen to randomly
   know Peter Parker’s height and weight (yes, we’re referring to the
   fictional character who turns into Spiderman). But, more than that,
   it’s also welcome news for all of us who geek-out about our own
   work—passionately probing to innovate, improve, dissect, and lead
   others to the discovery of their best selves.

   We’re geeks about why people and companies do the things they do. We
   want to understand the reasons Richard Branson is so admired as a
   leader, the reason Stance socks seemingly transformed men’s attire by
--
   change everything we know about travel.

   The truth is, all of us are geeks on some level, about something.
   However, we’ve found that most of us don’t focus our inner geek on
   utilizing some of the most obvious, and powerful, paths to turn ideas
   into game-changing success. Here are five critical areas you should
   explore if you want to turn your geeky ideas into results.

   1. The Mentor: Yes, we can talk about leaders like Gates, Zuckerberg,
--
   a company) is going to swoop in and save the day. The problem is your
   opportunity. You are the person to solve it.” When obstacles exist,
   it’s important to focus your inner geek on the opportunity that’s being
   presented to you

--
   He’s right. Whether you travel across the country or across town,
   getting out of your routine and daily environment can inspire fresh
   thinking and analysis for your inner geek to process.

   5. The Child: Let’s face it, a lot of the geek stereotype focuses on
   science fiction and video games from our childhood. And, although
   there’s probably not a lot we can learn from a Wookie, organizational
--
   fun.

   Being a geek used to draw up images of social misfits, awkward
   conversations, and less than attractive personalities. But, that’s not
   the case anymore, as geeks have become the global trendsetters and
   influencers. It’s a welcome message, long-awaited, for many of us. …and
   it’s a club we’re not ashamed to belong to—because if you focus your
   inner-geek on the areas above, success isn’t too far behind.
   Follow me on Twitter. Check out my website.
   David Sturt and Todd Nordstrom
