Commentary

Being A Geek Is Not A Bad Thing

     * by Jack Loechner , Staff Writer @mp_research, May 2, 2016

   According to a new study by Imgur with YPulse, being a “geek” is now a
   positive thing. Not only are they NOT referred to as a “… nerdy person
   with no athletic ability or personal style, with little personality but
--
   Nerdy, Unattractive, Unrelatable, Socially awkward, or Esoteric” by
   GenXrs, but rather “… trendsetters behind pop culture manias and online
   viral content; today’s geeks are tastemakers” by Millennials.

   While previous generations saw the geek label as feeling they had to
   hide their geekier interests, Millennials have embraced being geeks.
   They’re more likely than Xers and Boomers to call themselves geeks or
   say they are into geeky things, and older generations are far more
   likely to say they don’t consider themselves geeks at all. Xers and
   Boomers might have been embarrassed by geekdom, but that attitude has
   changed drastically, says the report.

   Just as Millennials influenced and shaped mainstream culture, they too
   have transformed what it means to be a geek, and have inspired millions
   more to embrace the term, says the report. Geek is now defined as being
   incredibly passionate about your interests, even when those interests
   are unpopular.
--
   spotlight on how big, how influential, and how important this group is…
    to any business who wants to be relevant in the years ahead…,” and a
   female, non-geek says “…Geek means someone that has an over-the-top
   interest in something… like a science geek… when you refer to someone
   as a geek… you can expect this person to be somewhat of an expert on
   the topic…”

   For Geeks, Being A Geek Is Something To Be Proud Of


   Full Geeks

                                  All Geeks

                                  Non-Geeks

   Being a geek is not a bad thing

                                     93%
--
                                     76%

   I would be proud to be called a geek

                                     80
--
                                     30

   I consider my close friends to be geeks

                                     70
--
                                     12

   I would prefer my children to be geeks

                                     68
--
                                     23

   I have been in a romantic relationship with a geek

                                     56
--
                                     29

   I consider my parents to be geeks

                                     33
--

   As Millennials have influenced and shaped mainstream culture, they too
   have transformed what it means to be a geek, and have inspired millions
   more to embrace the term. Geek is now defined as being incredibly
   passionate about your interests, even when those interests are
   unpopular.

   Being a “geek” is a positive thing for millennials:
     * 12% of millennials (12%) do not consider themselves geeks at all.
       Being a geek today doesn’t mean what it used to. Eighty-two percent
       of millennial geeks say the geek label isn’t a bad thing, which is
       notably different attitude than older generations
     * Only 38% of Xers and Boomers consider themselves geeks or admit to
       their geeky interests. While previous generations saw the geek
       label as an insult, millennials have embraced being geeks, and
       geekdom is cool.

   Millennial geeks are more prolific and influential:
     * There are 83 million Millennials in the U.S. and 60% qualify as a
       geek and 23% are self-proclaimed hardcore geeks
     * Today’s geeks are tastemakers who learn things first and push them
       forward: 82% say their interests grow in popularity, and 89% learn
       about things before the rest of their friends
     * These are the trendsetters behind pop culture obsessions and viral
       content online: 40% of geeks say they have created a gif, video
       related to their interest
     * 49% say they spread memes, 67% say they know about things before
--
       topic

   Geeks Are More Interested In Movies, Video Games, Technology, Science,
   Books And Comics Than Non-Geeks.


   Geek

                                  Non-Geek

   Movies
--
   Source: Imgur with YPulse, April 2016

   Geeks are extremely hard to reach, says the report:
     * Geeks are more likely than non-geeks to use ad-blockers, with 76%
       saying they have used one, and are more likely to say they’ve never
       seen an ad that they like.
     * 32% of geeks feel as though brands cannot relate to them. Geeks
       rely most heavily on online communities for discovery, learning and
       decision-making.
     * When asked about learning more about interests, searching for new
       things, or making a decision, 49% of geeks say online communities
       are their top resource

   The majority of Millennials don’t just think being a geek is not a bad
   thing, says the report, they think being a geek is a something to be
   proud of. It has become cool to be a geek. Thanks to young consumers’
   shifting attitude toward geekiness, the entertainment and interests
   that were once considered just geeky, like superheroes, fantasy, and
   space, have become huge cultural hot topics, and major money makers.

   If the things geeks were into ten years ago are massively popular now,
   what they’re into today could be the next big thing for years to come,
   opines the report. Millennial Geeks are more likely to have unique
   interests compared to non-geeks, concludes the report. They’re more
   likely to spot trends before the rest of their peers, and they’re more
   likely to see things grow in popularity after being interested in them
   first. Millennial Geeks are cultural influencers and behind the web’s
   most viral content.

