   Parenting/Parent Stories

Geek Love: Why the Next Generation of Nerds Is Cool Now

   Kali Sakai
--
Published on: January 30, 2014

   3 geek girls dressed up

   “You have the movie taste of a 12-year-old boy,” my friend Amy joked.
--
   Millennium Falcon spaceship with Han Solo and Chewbacca action figures.

   Yes, I am a lifelong geek. And now, in my late 30s, I am also a mom,
   ushering my kids into a generation for which geekiness suddenly is not
   only much cooler, but everywhere.

Geek defined

   So what is a “geek,” exactly? Most geeks are self-proclaimed. One of
   the most common traits of geekdom is having less conventional
   interests, with a slant toward science fiction, fantasy, gaming, comic
   books, cult movies/programs/books and science in general. “Being a geek
   might set you apart from the mainstream to the point that you feel a
   special affinity with a stranger who shares the same ‘geekness,’”
   explains Dave Neil, a dad of three from Bellevue.

   Geeks are also known for their love of detail and desire to always know
   more. Corrina Lawson, content director for GeekMom.com, explains that
   geeks have “an innate and near-insatiable curiosity” driving them to
   seek deeper understanding of everything from everyday subjects to their
   own specific fandoms (a community of fans devoted to a common show,
   story, game or characters).

   Another bona fide geek trait is valuing intelligence and imagination so
   much that it becomes a lifestyle and/or a professional choice. “Having
   an all-encompassing hobby can even lead to a career. For me, my
   interest in science has led to one,” says Adrienne M. Roehrich, vice
   president of the board of GeekGirlCon, the Seattle-based organization
   and annual convention celebrating female geeks.

   Perhaps the most endearing aspect of geekdom isn’t so much what geeks
   love, but how they love and share it. Today’s geeks swarm at large,
   organized conventions (or “cons”) where like-minded adults and kids —
   often dressed up in costume — commune. The cons promote geek media and
   connect sellers and buyers of all sorts of merchandise. Wil Wheaton, an
   actor from Star Trek: The Next Generation and the de facto “Nerd King,”
--
   that.

Yesterday’s geeky teens

   When I first heard Wheaton’s proclamation, a lump formed in my throat.
   Geeks of my generation epitomized the outcast. Movies like Weird
   Science, Revenge of the Nerds and Real Genius captured that awkward,
   misunderstood dweebishness that other geeks and I lived every day.

   Cyrus Kirby, proprietor of FatherGeek.com, remembers being called a
   geek on the school bus and the playground in a way that “was meant to
   suggest I was somehow weird or different in a way that society would
   consider abnormal.”
--
   But outgrowing the playground didn’t mean an end to the shunning.
   Robert Holladay, a Portland dad and Batman enthusiast, recalls, “Back
   in junior high and high school, geeks were a very small fringe group
   who were relegated to a back table in the school library."

--
   proved a paradoxical time: I yearned to “fit in,” but I also wanted to
   escape into my passions, many of them not stereotypically girly. It’s
   an experience many geeky girls of my generation share.

   “When I was growing up, geek was a really bad word. So I always knew I
   was a bit different and interested in stuff outside the mainstream,
   especially for girls,” says Lawson of GeekMom.

   It wasn’t until high school that I finally found and was embraced by a
   group of people who shared my love for nerd fodder like sci-fi/fantasy
   movies, comic book heroes and obscure British comedy shows. It was only
   then that I realized being a geek might be OK.

   Girl Dressed as Darth vader
--
‘It’s cool to be different’

   Unlike their parents’ generation, today’s self-identified geeky teens
   don’t face nearly the same ridicule about their interests. Lani, a
   14-year-old from Wilmington, N.C., attends conventions in costume as
--
   comic or video game. Cosplay has its own devoted subculture and is
   often prominently on display at events such as comic conventions and
   “geek” movie openings.

   “Cosplay is so much fun, because you can literally dress up as anything
--
   could not choose a more expensive hobby,” Lani laments.

   Social media is helping geeks to be accepted and embraced, Lani says.
   “Places like Tumblr and Instagram are full of nerds and fandom bloggers
   who enjoy talking about the things that interest them.”
--
   that kind of culture is becoming more popular,” says Jacob, a
   13-year-old in Los Angeles. “The popularity deflates the nastiness of
   the idea of geekdom.” Jacob is an avid Rubik’s cube solver and loves
   video games. His dad, Robert Holladay, introduced him to geek
   interests. As a geek, Jacob has it a lot easier than his dad did. Not
   only is current culture on his side, but he also has a parent who is
   wholly supportive of his interests.

   Last October on a rainy weekend in downtown Seattle, more than 3,000
   geeks and their supporters filled four levels of the conference center
   at the Washington State Convention Center for GeekGirlCon 2013. Gamers,
   exhibitors, panel speakers and staff mingled with attendees, and the
   press was abuzz with the news that, for the first time in its
--
   wore a dress resembling the blue TARDIS (a time-travel machine). As
   costumed attendees milled around us during the lunch break, Clara said
   that she thought the best thing about being a geek was “marveling at
   human genius.” I asked the girls what they thought had changed about
   being a geek since their parents’ generation. “It’s cool to be
   different,” Grace said.

--
A disturbance in the Force

   But life is not yet perfect in all of geekdom. The growing pains of
   transforming from a fringe group into a more visible demographic with
   increasing clout has created some challenges for the larger geek
   community. Despite the fact that many geeks know firsthand how it feels
   to be marginalized and intimidated, in recent years some female con
   attendees, gamers and other geeks have complained of discrimination by
   their male cohorts.

   “Some geeks put themselves in exclusionary cliques, [and] a vocal
   minority of male geeks seems to want to exclude some women,” GeekMom’s
   Lawson says. “Some of them run comic, video game and movie companies.”

   Last year, some female cosplayers were harassed and photographed by men
   without permission at New York Comic Con. It’s disappointing that these
   attitudes still exist in some corners of the geek world. But, increased
   awareness of these incidents and media exposure raised an uproar, and
   conventions have since stepped up their policies on attendee conduct
--
   the rules. This is a great move toward keeping cons safe for all
   attendees. But changing hearts and minds is a gradual process that’s
   going to require vocal support from female and male geeks alike. After
   all, isn’t respect of fellow geeks a cornerstone of fully loving and
   sharing our interests?

Hip to be square

   Thanks in part to technology, geek culture is on its way to the
   mainstream, even as that change makes many proud geeks shudder.

   “For the first time in human history, we can share our thoughts, engage
   others and have an open discussion with everyone in the world” because
   of technology, says Kirby of FatherGeek. Even if you don’t live near
   other people who share your interests, a virtual community is at your
   fingertips.
--
   Bill Svitavsky, co-editor of the book Ages of Heroes, Eras of Men and
   an associate professor and emerging services librarian at Rollins
   College in Florida, believes geek culture resonates better with the
   current generation because of the ease of access to information.
   Technology has prompted a widespread “culture of commentary,” he says.
--
   information on favorite fandoms, characters and celebrities.

   And the appetite for geek-centric content only continues to increase.
   The GeekMom audience has consistently grown since the community was
   founded three years ago, Lawson says. “Geeks have gone mainstream.”

   This is great news for normalizing geek culture. Patton Oswalt,
   stand-up comedian, actor and Star Wars nerd, explained during a Nerdist
   podcast why mainstreaming is a good thing. “You get old enough to know
--
   staying mainstream and bloated.”

   So despite what some die-hards think, the slide of geekiness into
   popular culture is not necessarily a harbinger of doom.

Sharing with the next generation

   Geekdom is righteous fun when shared with kids.

   Science fiction, fantasy, superheroes and Anglophilia all fostered my
   own curiosity, sense of humor and boldness. And I’d really love for my
   kids to be as inspired by geekdom as I was.

   But they are still young, so we’ll start with the basics. I’ll just
--

   With both Seattle’s Emerald City Comicon and San Diego’s Comic-Con
   International coming up next month, geeks will again have the spotlight
   at a time when being geeky is more acceptable than ever. Here’s hoping
   that all geeks — regardless of their age, gender, interests, cosplay
   budget or fandom knowledge — show how inclusive and progressive this
   community can be. It’s where I found my own true identity and where I
--
   So say we all.

   Seattle writer Kali Sakai is a lifelong geek married to a computer
   nerd. She’d love for their two young children to speak Klingon, Elvish
   or Wookiee someday. But at this point, she’ll settle for her daughter
--
     __________________________________________________________________

Dr. Who and Tardis toy Passing the geek torch

   When I interviewed other parents for this piece, I asked, “What are you
   excited to share with your kids about being a geek?”

   While I had expected answers such as certain movies, shows and
   superheroes, what actually came through was the aspirational side of
   geekdom.

   “I want to teach them to not be ashamed of loving something. I want
--
   different ways.”

   — Sara Conway of Geek-Parents.com

   “It was important to me to share an aspect of the world that encouraged
--
   — Portland dad Robert Holladay

   “Geekdom lets you stay a kid for as long as you refuse to grow up —
   which makes being a parent even more fun. Parents are happy to see that
   they can still be who they are — geeks — even after they have kids.”

   — Kelly Knox of GeekMom.com

   “I’m really happy that my daughter enjoys going to Dragon Con with me.
--
   [but] thrilled to go with me makes me happy.”

   — Susie Murph of How to Grow Your Geek podcast

   STAY CONNECTED!
--
   ascended the media and high-tech industries and then transformed into
   a "domestic project manager" to raise her family. As a native
   Washingtonian and multi-ethnic, shark-loving tech geek, you can find
   more of her stories and observations on evidentlyblog.com.

