   value in Vox’s work this year, will you chip in? (BUTTON) ×

Tech nerds are smart. But they can't seem to get their heads around politics.

   By David Roberts@drvolts Aug 27, 2015, 9:31am EDT
--
     * Share All sharing options

Share All sharing options for: Tech nerds are smart. But they can't seem to
get their heads around politics.

--
     * Email

   A nerd who just found out about the filibuster. A nerd who just found
   out about the filibuster. (Shutterstock)

   We live in an age of nerds.

   Sometimes I try to explain to my kids that I grew up in a time — a dark
--
   fantasy-based card games, watching Doctor Who, or being really into
   computers could get you publicly pantsed. There was a clear social
   hierarchy, and the way it worked, for boys at least, was that the nerds
   —the kids who had weird, obscure obsessions, who knew everything about
   something nobody else knew anything about — were at the bottom. At the
--

   My kids have no idea what the hell I'm talking about. The coolest kids
   they know are nerds. Their heroes are nerds. Their favorite
   billionaires are nerds. Nerds are the ones making the best movies and
   apps and Vine channels (that's a thing, right?), the ones inventing
   stuff that changes the world. The archetypes in all those '80s teen
   movies mean nothing to my children. These days, nerds run the world.

   But while nerds have taken over pop culture and technology, there's one
   area they haven't mastered: politics. To see what I mean, let's start
   with an unsolicited phone call from Elon Musk, the king of nerds, to
   one of his subjects.
   elon musk
--
   (Flickr: JD Lasica)

Wait But Why exemplifies the nerd spirit

   One of the purest expressions of the nerd spirit is the site Wait But
   Why, started in 2013 by Tim Urban, a Harvard graduate and co-owner of a
   tutoring company but really, by his own testimony, just some dude.

   Urban is a nerd. He gets interested in some complicated subject, digs
   into it until he feels like he really understands it, and he explains
   it. (To get a flavor, start with the one about procrastination and the
--
   I bring all this up because WBW recently tackled some issues close to
   my heart. The impetus was a telephone call from Elon Musk. (How's that
   for a nerd seal of approval?) Musk wanted Urban to come have a chat, to
   see if Urban would take on a few topics Musk thinks are poorly
   understood by the broader public.
--

   The one problem I had with the post is in its treatment of politics,
   which to me illustrates some fairly common nerd shortcomings on that
   subject.

   Indeed, politics is one area where the general science/tech nerd ethos
   has not exactly covered itself in glory (I'm looking at you, Larry
   Lessig). And it's a shame, because if tech nerds want to change the
   world — as they say with numbing frequency that they do — they need to
   figure out politics, the same way they're figuring out solar power or
--
   tree trunk, as Urban's post demonstrates.

   (Note: There are policy and political nerds, of course. I am one, and
   work with lots of others. But the overlap between that demo and the
   larger tech nerd demo is pretty slim.)

The quasi-libertarian anti-politics of the tech nerd

   Urban writes, in his post on energy:
--
   between the lines here. Both are, in the argot of the day, problematic.

   The first, which is extremely common in the nerd community, is a
   distaste for government and politics. Sometimes this shades over into
   ideological libertarianism (see: Peter Thiel, who wants to build a
--
   subjects Urban hasn't rolled up his sleeves and dug into yet. He can be
   forgiven — many political pundits are working with the same moldy
   frames, to this day. And he won't get much help from his fellow nerds.
   But it's important.

--

   But politics is about who shows up. The fossil fuel interests that are
   threatened show up. Nerds like Urban, vaguely repulsed by politics, do
   not.

   (Actually, that's too sweeping. Bill Gates is showing up. Google is
   showing up. The tech industry is waking up. But rank-and-file tech nerd
   engagement with politics remains sporadic and inconsistent at best.)

--
   way to the promised land.

Time for for more nerdsplainers on politics

   There is no subject more ripe for the dissection of an obsessive nerd
   than American politics. It is ridden with myths and outdated
   conventional wisdom. And the kind of people who read Wait But Why are
   among those most in need of tree trunk knowledge of politics.

   Nerds want to make the world better, but they cannot do so without
   allies in the public sector. They should roll up their sleeves, hold
   their noses, and try to get a better sense of the complicated web of
