   Health

Is My Kid a Nerd? Psychologists Have a Scientific Answer for Parents.

   The test in question is called the Nerdy Personality Attributes Scale,
   and it was developed to objectively quantify nerdiness.


--
   Updated: April 15, 2022
   Originally Published: April 4, 2018
   A nerdy child in glasses and a sweater.

   If you find yourself at Comic-Con holding hands with your bespectacled,
   Bill Nye-loving pre-teen while they chat away in fluent Klingon, you
   may have a nerdy kid on your hands. And, let’s face it, there are worse
   things. You may even get out of paying for college. But your nerdy kid
   might suffer for their proclivities as well. Kids aren’t getting
   stuffed into lockers at quite the same rate they used to, but children
   with esoteric interests and quick minds often find themselves
   ostracized. All the more reason to keep a close eye on your spawn’s
   nerd-dom. And the more reason to have them take this psychometric test
   for nerdiness.

   Yes, there’s a real test. Yes, it’s legit. Yes, it’s weird that it
   exists.

   The psychometric test in question is called The Nerdy Personality
   Attributes Scale, and it was developed to objectively quantify
   nerdiness. (We assume the scientists who designed the scale scored
   very, very high.) Since “nerd” is essentially an objective social
   label, designing the test involved surveying a very large pool of nerds
   and asking them which personality attributes they possess. In other
   words, the scale can estimate how similar your child’s personality is
   to that of the average person who identifies as a nerd. It’s shockingly
   instructive.

Meet The Nerdy Personality Attributes Scale

   Ask your child to answer the following 26 questions with either
   Disagree (1), Neutral (3), or Agree (5). The average score is 50. Any
   higher than that—and your kid might just be a nerd.
    1. I like to play RPGs. (ex. D&D)
    2. I was in advanced classes.
--
       or overly rigorous.

Well, You Have A Nerdy Kid. Now What?

   First, rejoice. Some of the greatest minds (not to mention
   billionaires) would have scored pretty darn high on the Nerdiness
   Scale, too. But with great nerdiness comes great responsibility.
   Because of your nerdy kid’s dispositions, studies suggest they may be
   more likely to be bullied.

--
   rehearsing appropriate responses to bullies.

   There are also studies that suggest some natural-born nerds —
   especially young women — intentionally underperform in school so as not
   to be perceived as nerdy. It would be a tragedy to see your math whiz
   flunk calculus due to social pressures, so make sure to reinforce the
   nerdiness at home. There’s nothing uncool about a free ride to college.
   Right, dad?

