Related Topics

     * Nerd
     * Nerd Girl
     * Nerd Day
     * Nerd World

Join the Community
--
   Fact Checked

What is a Nerd?

   Tricia Christensen
--
   Last Modified Date: November 16, 2022

   Nerd is a term that may be used with pride, or one that may be used in
   a derogatory sense. A nerd is typically a person of any race who has
   strong aptitude in the sciences, math, and particularly computer
   science, and who may also be viewed as out of step with popular culture
   in matters of dress, or who is socially awkward. The designation of
   nerd may simply be applied to a person whose uniqueness sets them apart
   from what is considered the "norm," for no particular reason at all.
   The term is first mentioned in the Dr. Seuss book, If I Ran the Zoo,
   which was published in 1950.

   From the 1950s onward, use of the term nerd increased, though drip,
   square, and egghead may have been more popular as synonyms to describe
   nerds. It’s not clear how much the television series Happy Days
   contributed to overall culture in the US and elsewhere, but it did
   bring the term into tremendous usage by the average person, since it
   was used so often in the series. Since Happy Days, most people
   understand the term nerd as that described in the previous paragraph.
   [INS: :INS]
   Microsoft co-founder is largely responsible for reversing the negative
   connotations of the word "nerd." Microsoft co-founder is largely
   responsible for reversing the negative connotations of the word "nerd."

   Sometimes people seek to modify the name, and add other descriptions to
   nerds. For instance science nerds are people most skilled at science,
   while music nerds may be those people in high school and junior high or
   middle school who devote most of their free time to music. Both types
   of nerds tend to express high math skills; there is a strong connection
   between musical ability and mathematical prowess.
   [INS: :INS]
   Someone who shows a particular aptitude for science might be called a
   "science nerd." Someone who shows a particular aptitude for science
   might be called a "science nerd."

   As first used in Happy Days the term was anything but flattering. It
   emphasized the social awkwardness of people and made some suggestion
   that interest in science or math was something to be ashamed of. Some
   famous former nerds have certainly proved the lie of this assumption.
   Bill Gates, now one of the richest men on the planet, used his science
   nerd skills to great effect, and perception about being interested and
   innovative in the sciences now may be viewed with positivism rather
   than with censure. Many nerds and non-nerds alike aspire to the Bill
   Gates path.
   [INS: :INS]
   Many nerds have a particular aptitude in math. Many nerds have a
   particular aptitude in math.

   There are also some interesting studies connecting high functioning
   Asperger’s, Non-Verbal Learning Disorder, and high functioning autism
   to nerdism. By nature, people with these conditions tend to have
   extreme trouble in social situations, and may misunderstand others’
   language, range of expression and things like sarcasm, facial
   expression and vocal inflection. Yet, such folks also tend to be
   extremely adept in the sciences. This suggests that discrimination
   focused on nerds may truly be discrimination against several recognized
   learning disabilities and gives people pause as to whether using the
   term in a derogatory fashion is by nature extremely insulting.
   [INS: :INS]

   On the other hand, there are now many kids who think being a nerd is
   something to aspire to. For a while, fashion embraced “nerd chic.” Some
   teachers and educators wish they could do more to inspire students to
   become nerds, but if true nerdiness is predicated on learning
   disability, this may not be possible. There is, however, growing
   respect for this skilled and invaluable member of society, reflected in
   things like Spain’s Nerd Pride Day, which has been celebrated since
   2006.
   [INS: :INS]
--
     * What is a Mortimer?
     * What is an Egghead?
     * What is Nerdcore?

Discussion Comments
--

   My mate is an all right guy, but when it comes down to it in my opinion
   he is a full on nerd! I mean he's 15 years of age, never goes out
   (unless prompted) and has an unhealthy obsession with anything
   regarding the gaming world. He also loves DrgonBallZ, which for his age
--
   yesterday

   I definitely think that being termed a nerd has gone from being a
   negative thing, to a positive one that people take pride in. And I
   think it's great that people have gotten to a point where they can be
--

   In my opinion, there is sometimes a bit of eccentricity that goes along
   with being a nerd, but maybe that's a good thing. People should be able
   to be themselves without ridicule.

--
   February 11, 2011

   I wasn't aware that the word nerd became so popular by it's use on
   "Happy Days". Being from a different generation, when I think of TV
   being related to nerds, the show "Family Matters" comes to my mind. I
   would think that the character of Steve Urkel on that show, was
   probably one of the most famous television nerds ever.

   I've even known of people dressing in nerd costumes for Halloween to
   look like Steve Urkel.

--
   February 10, 2011

   Although some people who are considered nerds may have a form of a
   learning disability, I don't think that all nerds do. That would be to
   say that someone like Bill Gates actually has a learning disability.
   I've never heard that he does.

   I also think that the word nerd is now used to describe people who are
   very adept in the sciences, mathematics or technology, but are not
   necessarily socially inept. I've seen a lot people who consider
   themselves to be nerds, and quite proudly, that handle social
   situations very well.

--
   [lightbox-ico-loading.gif]
     * Microsoft co-founder is largely responsible for reversing the
       negative connotations of the word "nerd."
       By: Maik Meid
       Microsoft co-founder is largely responsible for reversing the
       negative connotations of the word "nerd."
     * Someone who shows a particular aptitude for science might be called
       a "science nerd."
       By: Creativa
       Someone who shows a particular aptitude for science might be called
       a "science nerd."
     * Many nerds have a particular aptitude in math.
       By: Creativa
       Many nerds have a particular aptitude in math.

   Language Humanities
