   #Digital Media Services UK Limited » Feed Digital Media Services UK
   Limited » Comments Feed Digital Media Services UK Limited » Joe Blogs:
   Nerds still aren’t cool and here’s why… Comments Feed alternate
   alternate

--
News

Joe Blogs: Nerds still aren’t cool and here’s why…

   You are a nerd. You nerd.

   That used to be a serious, serious burn but these days it’s something
   of a compliment. As someone who grew up watching 90s teen movies (where
   it was always the goal to become ‘cool’), I must admit this is still a
   bit weird to me. Don’t get me wrong, it’s great that nerdiness isn’t
   derided in the way it used to be and brains are celebrated as much as
   brawn. I just can’t figure out why it suddenly changed. I googled, ‘why
   are nerds cool now?’ and all I found was self-confessed nerds
   congratulating themselves for the achievements of Steve Jobs. There was
   a lot of, ‘we are the best, we are clever, we get the best jobs, girls
--
   OK, so what am I talking about? Well, with all the news and
   announcements from San Diego Comic-Con (SDCC) taking over the internet,
   it’s got us thinking that the definition of ‘nerd’ appears to have
   changed. Or is it the definition of ‘cool’ that’s changed? Let’s have a
   look at some of the ‘nerdy’ behaviour penetrating the mainstream and
   see if we can’t figure this one out.

--
   mentions surrounding them, and it’s literally been our job to dig in
   and analyse the progress of the franchise through the years… to be
   nerds. I mean, look at Thor. He looks like Walt Disney himself drew him
   and then encased him in muscle, but he still teaches Natalie Portman
   (who happens to be the black swan!) lessons about the universe that
--
   wise, royal, performance-enhancing drug-user of a super-athlete also
   has intricate knowledge of a science unknown to all other top
   physicists. And come on, the most nerdy, brainy,
   awkward-around-other-humans avenger of the lot is Bruce Banner and he
   also happens to be the biggest and most powerful. They pulled off a
   mean tick here, they’ve made the nerds and the cool kids want to be the
   same characters. They identify with the same people…imagine that.

Technology Has Levelled The Playing Field For Dweebs

   Not only that, cool kids and nerds are getting more similar interests.
   When I was a kid, computer games were considered to be ‘children’s
   toys’ and adults that played them fell into two categories; ‘supportive
--
   about Keanu Reeves featuring in the game, Cyberpunk 2077, definitely
   kept us busy at DMS; especially since Reeves was instrumental in
   beginning the ‘nerds are cool’ movement when he played Neo in The
   Matrix. And with more powerful applications of the internet, gamers can
   play against people from all over the world in a safe environment. So,
--
   the only thing that really matters is your ability to play the game/how
   many hours you’ve stayed up playing it instead of sleeping just to get
   good enough. It’s a nerd’s dream because it doesn’t matter how big your
   opponent is in real life, or how confident they are, how utterly
   desired they are by everyone they meet and how easy they find it to
--
   made all the ironic cowboy hats and leg warmers form fresher’s week
   look like a plumber’s overalls. There’s a sweet spot that’s been here.
   The creativity of the nerd has met the cool kids’ preoccupation with
   appearances and created something that celebrates them both. So, does
   that mean that nerds are now hitting the gym? Or are gym bods with
   jacked up muscles starting to get massively in with Frodo and the gang?

   Actually, it’s both! Like Cate Blanchet and Benjamin Button, we’ve all
   met in the middle. Nerds are becoming like the cool kids and the cool
   kids are becoming like the nerds. The process is well underway of
   homogenising any of the previously conceived ideas of ‘coolness’ or
   ‘nerdiness’, which means… NERDS DON’T EXIST ANYMORE! Nerds can’t be
   cool because they’ve ceased to be… they’ve eaten themselves! We’ve ALL
   eaten ourselves! Because, if everyone is cool, then no one is and if
   everyone is a nerd, no one is, right? Or are we all just posers? But,
   if everyone is a ‘poser’, no one is, which means we all must be legit.
   But if everyone is ‘legit’ then no one is… Hmmm, i’m stuck in a loop.
