   #Adam Eason » Feed Adam Eason » Comments Feed Adam Eason » 7 Reasons
   Why Being a Geek is Awesome Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate

   Adam Eason
--
   ____________________

7 Reasons Why Being a Geek is Awesome

   by Adam Eason | May 2, 2017 | Hypnosis, Life of Adam, Personal
--
     * Google+

   Let’s talk geek. If I were to take some of the official dictionary
   definition of ‘geek’ and tweek it a little bit to contextualise this
   article…

   Definition of hypnosis geek.

   noun: hypnosis geek; plural noun: hypnosis geeks (like those who listen
   to my podcasts, train with my college and come to my hypnosis geek
   dinners)

   1. A knowledgeable and obsessive enthusiast.
   “a computer geek”
   “a hypnosis geek”

   verb: geek; 3rd person present: geeks; past tense: geeked; past
   participle: geeked; present participle: geeking

   1. Someone who will
--
   – be or become extremely excited or enthusiastic about a subject,
   typically one of specialist or minority interest.
   “I am totally geeking out over this meta-analysis detailing the
   efficacy of hypnosis as a means of treating dyslexia.“

   I like hypnosis geeks, and consider myself to be one. I am incredibly
   technical and derive great joy from the theoretical and academic debate
   of my subject. I lecture on the detailed workings of hypnosis, have
--
   well indeed, but importantly, I get excited about it, I love what can
   be done with hypnosis. I think that qualifies me to be a self-titled
   hypnosis geek.

   What actually is a geek in general terms though?

   Geeks are a subculture which is growing more and more prevalent in
   contemporary society: previously bullied and marginalised, thanks to
   shows like The Big Bang Theory, Doctor Who (heck, sci-fi TV and films
   in general) and a change in public perception of a number of qualities
   that are considered desirable in an individual, being a geek is finally
   becoming cool. Though, they are cool also because they are not bothered
   about being cool. Try being a geek to be cool and you simply become a
   hipster, and whether you like twelve-foot-long beards, wearing wooly
   hats during the height of Summer, wearing skinny jeans and lumberjack
   shirts or not, that is not my topic here today.

   Being a geek then, according to research by Imgur, is actually cool in
   today’s world – especially among Millennials. In fact, 60% of the 83
   million Millennials consider themselves geeks compared to just 38% of
   GenXers and Boomers. And, the study also shows that geeks are the
   trendsetters and influencers (84% of geeks say people look to them for
   advice while only 60% of non-geeks say they get asked for advice).
   Although, some places haven’t quite embraced geeks and geek culture
   like others have, now it’s changing. But, more than that, it’s also
   welcome news for all of us who geek-out about our own work—passionately
   probing to innovate, improve, dissect, and lead others to the discovery
   of their best selves (or best elements of their professional field, for
--
   Pegg:

   “Being a geek is all about being honest about what you enjoy and not
   being afraid to demonstrate that affection. It means never having to
   play it cool about how much you like something. It’s basically a
   license to proudly emote on a somewhat childish level rather than
   behave like a supposed adult. Being a geek is extremely liberating.”
   Being a geek isn’t something to be ashamed of. It’s something to be
   proud of and most definitely an awesome way to be!  Here are a few
   reasons why this is the case (and please bear in mind this entire
--
   right?):

   1. The geek brain has an innate ability to focus intensely:
   Some may call it ‘obsessive’, but when geeks put their minds to a task
   or subject, they will be able to focus on it like no other group of
   people. It’s the reason geeks can plough through 20 academic papers in
   a single setting, burn through an entire boxset of Breaking Bad in a
   weekend, the reason they keep having to increase the maximum character
--
   completed?!

   2. Geeks are defined by their enthusiasm for things:
   “They’re enthusiasts. Not having a life means you get to love things
   with a passion and nobody bothers you about it.” – John Burnside
   In general geeks are inherently enthusiastic about the things they like
   or enjoy. They source props and replicas of the film and TV objects
   they think are awesome, They will wear t-shirts bearing catchphrases
--

   If you’ve ever been in a training of mine and heard the way I talk
   about the TV show Red Dwarf, then you know that sci-fi geekery is
   another facet of mine.

   3. A geek is surprisingly resilient:
   For some, it may derive from having fun poked at them, or being teased
   about the things they love, but geeks tend to be incredibly resilient
   and able to bounce back from pretty much anything. That’s why they make
   such good community moderators, able to take the ridiculous abuse of
--
   anything for the rest of the day.

   Resilience in part and parcel of being a geek.

   4. The geek ‘Mind Palaces’ are vast and full of knowledge:
   Sure, a lot of the knowledge that fills their Mind Palaces might be
   largely useless pop culture references like the term ‘Mind Palace’
--
   something a few times, they can commit it to memory with a surprising
   degree of accuracy, and secret it away in the storage locker facility
   that is the geek-brain.

   When you love a subject and have a repeated, consistent devotion to it,
   it is so much easier to retain and recall that information.

   5. Geeks are innovators:
   Have you heard about the new social networking site? Or the latest in
   wearable technology? The new iOS update? No? You would have heard about
   it if you were a geek, because geeks love new technology and love
   sharing news and information about it. Follow a geek on Twitter and
   you’ll know all about that stuff weeks before you would have done
   otherwise, usually the moment it’s announced.

   Geeks are usually the ones who have created the latest innovations, and
   geeks are usually pioneering the field that they work within. Whatever
   field you work in or have an interest in, find a geek of that field,
   follow them closely, without stalking them, obviously.

   6. Geeks advocate for the outsider or the uncool:
   Geeks often side with the underdog, or the oppressed and are sort of
   accustomed to being looked upon in unusual ways, made fun of and pushed
   to the edges of society. Because of it, geeks tend to be amazing
   advocates for the outsiders and the “uncool.”

--
   and enthusiasm.

   7. The geek focuses on a person’s strengths and skills, not their
   influence:
   It’s simple for geeks. How much money you have in the bank, how many
   friends you have and how much influence you have just doesn’t matter.
   Those things aren’t a positive or
--
   yet the masses tend to opt for following those who make the most noise,
   or have the loudest voices. This cartoon strip sums it up for me……
   The truth is, all of us are geeks on some level, about something.
   However, Most of us don’t focus our inner geek on utilising some of the
   most obvious, and powerful, paths to turn ideas into game-changing
   success. Here are two critical areas you should explore if you want to
   turn your geeky ideas into results.

   a) Find a Mentor.
--
   doing. Whether you travel across the country or across town, getting
   out of your routine and daily environment can inspire fresh thinking
   and analysis for your inner geek to process. At the very least, be
   around people who can aid the mentoring process and that you can
   progressively learn from. You know the old adage; if you’re the
--
   trainings, courses, people and more besides, that starts a journey of
   exploration and discovery for you. Learning, developing and humbly
   wanting to now more is the road of the geek.

   Get lost a few times, and you derive a deeper understanding of the
   area.

   Being a geek used to draw up images of social misfits, awkward
   conversations, and less than attractive personalities. But, that’s not
   the case anymore, as geeks have become the global trendsetters and
   influencers. It’s a welcome message, long-awaited, for many of us. …and
   it’s a club we’re not ashamed to belong to—because if you focus your
   inner-geek on the areas above, success isn’t too far behind.

   Go embrace your inner geek.

   If you’d like to learn more or if this article has resonated with you
