   Signing out of account, Standby...

7 Reasons Why Nerds Rule The (Business) World

   Bill Gates once said, 'Be nice to nerds. Chances are you'll end up
   working for one.' Here are the mindsets that 'nerds' embrace that you
   can emulate in your life and business.
   By Matshona Dhliwayo
--
   unattractive, unpopular, and the butt of many jokes for their thick
   glasses, quirky braces and high-worn pants. Stereotypes aside though,
   and we realise that what society has come to label "nerds' are, in
   reality, a force to be reckoned with.
   Bigstock
--
   R100-Million Business

   The list of bonafide "nerd' tycoons is endless. Larry Page, Mark
   Zuckerberg, Elon Musk, and Jeff Bezos all reign supreme in their
   fields, with a combined estimated network of over USD250 billion. The
   numbers alone prove it, so much so that Bill Gates, the richest of them
   all, famously cautioned, "Be nice to nerds. Chances are you'll end up
   working for one."

--
   brutalized, they spend more time than most working on their dreams.
   Popularity hinders many from achieving their dreams. It's one reason
   why many jocks don't achieve more after university, while nerds end up
   magnates.
   2. They are obsessed with their hobbies. Spending all of their time and
   energy on them, they inevitably become the best at what they do.
   Research shows that it takes 10 000 hours to master a skill. Nerds
   typically dedicate far more to honing their skills early on in life.
   3. They love learning. They don't rely on their teachers alone for
--
   6. The world already assumes they are intelligent. Such prejudices mean
   geeks don't have to sell themselves as much as everyone. In fact, the
   nerdier they are the smarter they appear, and the smarter they appear
   the more opportunities they receive.
   7. They are not afraid of being themselves. It takes a lot to be
   yourself in a world that is constantly trying to mold you into someone
   else, especially if you are a nerd because you will be teased. But
   being unique, being original is a requirement to stand out. It's the
   only way you can produce products that wow everyone.
