   sitcom smackdown Mar. 12, 2013

The Evolution of the TV Nerd, From Potsie to Urkel to Abed

   By Jesse David Fox, a Vulture editor and host of Good One: A Podcast
   About Jokes

   It feels like the nerd is as old as time, but it’s a relatively young
   term and younger phenomenon. The first documented appearance of the
   word was in Dr. Seuss’s If I Ran the Zoo, but it would be decades
   before the classic nerd would materialize: smart, if not too smart;
   socially awkward; obsessive; glasses (often with tape); ill-fitting
   clothing; into sci-fi and/or computers; high and/or nasally voice.
   However, over the last 40 years or so the archetype has evolved beyond
   the Revenge of the Nerds stereotype into something more nuanced. And TV
   comedies had a lot to do with that. In celebration of the Inspector
   Spacetime–obsessed Abed, whose Community competed in today’s Sitcom
   Smackdown quarterfinals, we present the evolutionary ladder of the TV
   nerd, from its earliest appearance on Happy Days through Screech,
   Carlton, Lisa Simpson, and The Big Bang Theory.

--
   Photo: CBS

   Happy Days is credited for first popularizing the word nerd, and it was
   usually directed at Potsie, even if by today’s standards he doesn’t
   seem like much of one. (If anything, the more awkward Ralph Malph feels
   nerdier in retrospect.) Potsie was fairly square, but other than the
   Fonz, so were all of Richie Cunningham’s friends (and Richie); plus, he
   came off as a heartthrob when he’d sing with his band. He and Ralph
   were more goofy idiots, in the Rosencrantz and Guildenstern vein, than
   modern nerds. It says a lot about how far the nerd has come that at one
   time it just meant “Not the Fonz.” By that standard, everyone’s a nerd.

   1978: “The Nerds,” Saturday Night Live

   IFRAME: http://www.hulu.com/embed.html?eid=56j5-eujcxi-4qocky2bva

   Bill Murray and Gilda Radner’s nerds (Todd DiLaMuca and Lisa Loopner)
   were the real deal. They had the look and the voice and, most
   important, the personality. Murray explained what was so special about
   them in the SNL oral history Live From New York: “No one ever saw nerds
   enjoy themselves, really get funny. You never saw what really tickled
   them.” Their nerds weren’t just cheap jokes — they had real heart. It
   paved the way for TV nerds we care about.

   1988: Screech, Good Morning, Miss Bliss/Saved by the Bell
   Photo: NBC

   Screech had a lot of the classic nerd traits, in that he was super
   smart and not very cool. He was also very comfortable and aware that he
   was a nerd, which was new. What he brought to the nerd game more than
   anything was a sort of weirdness and eccentricity. (You know, like how
   he just had a robot.) It’s a quality that was incorporated in the many
   nerds that would come after him.

   1989: Urkel, Family Matters
--
   Family Matters was not supposed to be “The Urkel Show.” He was going to
   be a one-off character, but he was just too good. He was every single
   nerd trope pushed to the max: suspenders, high-water pants, glasses,
   clumsy, nasal voice, awkward, super smart, obsessive, with an
   unrequited love. His popularity definitely encouraged more and more
   nerd characters to show up on television.

   1989: Lisa, The Simpsons
--

   Unlike the rest of this list, Lisa is very young. She likes being smart
   and successful, but still has to come to terms with being a nerd.
   Before The Simpsons, no one really captured how isolating intelligence
   can feel, especially when you’re younger. It’s why “HOMR,” the
--
   Photo: NBC

   Carlton is closer to Potsie than any of these other nerds. He is
   exceedingly square, especially when compared to the Fonz-like Will
   Smith. He did well in school and, in general, just tried too hard. It’s
   not that nerds specifically always like Tom Jones, but his obsession
   with the singer, when mixed with his corny, iconic dance, was as nerdy
   as it gets. In general, he helped move the nerd away from the dominant
   glasses-and-high-pants aesthetic. You no longer needed the Loopner
   wardrobe to be a nerd.

   1994: Ross, Friends
--
   Ross really loved science and dinosaurs and karate (“ka-ra-tay”). He
   was also kind of a drip. The difference is Ross got the girl,
   consistently. Ross became TV’s first nerd sex symbol and pioneered the
   inevitable geek-chic craze. He showed what happens when nerdy kids grow
   up and move to New York and kind of become cool. Many, many shows today
   have formerly nerdy characters who are able to hang with classically
   cool people while maintaining their obsessions (à la Parks and
   Recreation’s Ben Wyatt or New Girl’s Jess Day).
--
   Photo: NBC

   By this point, it wasn’t new to see a bunch of nerds hang out with each
   other on TV; however, usually they would be just in the background
   while cool people did stuff. Freaks and Geeks put the audience inside
   that clique. Like Lisa, the geeks didn’t want to be nerds (they pined
   to be welcomed by the cool kids), but they could not change who they
   were and were tortured for it. But at least they had each other. Also,
   their playing of Dungeons and Dragons celebrated the nitty-gritty of
   nerd culture like no show really had.

   2007: Everyone But the Blonde Lady, Big Bang Theory
   Photo: CBS

   If you want to talk about the mainstreaming of nerd culture, here you
   go. Big Bang Theory is a show about nerds who like nerd things, and the
   sitcom is insanely popular. These are nerds who don’t have to get
   cooler as the get older; they are kings of their castles by being as
   nerdy as ever. It’s a culmination of all these years spent laughing
   at/with nerds.

   2009: Abed, Community
--

   Some might argue that The Big Bang Theory represents the watering down
   of being a nerd. It takes the most popular touchstones of the culture
   but glosses over the actual personality behind it. Abed is the real
   deal. Abed is more than a kinda-sorta awkward guy who likes Star Wars;
   he’s hardwired to be obsessive, to be incapable of truly relating to
   his friends. Abed represents the most complicated, dark, and honest
   portrayal of a nerd ever in television and film. And ultimately we
   wouldn’t be able to get such a rich nerd character if it weren’t for
   all the nerd boundaries the previous nerds broke down.

Related
--
     * friends
     * fresh prince of bel-air
     * nerds
     * More

   +Comments Leave a Comment

   Evolution of the TV Nerd, From Potsie to Abed

   Things you buy through our links may earn New York a commission.
