   Stay in touch MetroUK @MetroUK @Metro.co.uk

11 reasons geeks are hot

   Comment
--
   [1400x931171.jpg?quality=90&amp;strip=all&amp;zoom=1&amp;resize=540%2C3
   59]
   Geeks are a lot sexier than this these days (Picture: lofilolo)

   In the words of Sherlock’s Irene Adler: Brainy is the new sexy.

   Geeks have taken over the world, and they’re stealing hearts while
   they’re at it. It helps, of course, if you have some nerdy tendencies
   of your own, otherwise the unique passion of the geek will go over your
   head.

   So step aside, Barbie dolls and unreconstructed men – here’s why geeks
   are by far the hottest.

--

   Make way, hipsters, because no-one wears an ironic pop culture
   reference on their chest quite like a geek.

   2. Your love of comics/computer games etc makes you irresistible to
--

   I have been spontaneously proposed to thanks to my knowledge of the
   comic book Doom Patrol. It makes dating within geek circles really
   quite easy.

--
   comics

   Geeks are fully aware of the fact that they are geeks. They are also
   aware that, in the eyes of some people, that makes them weird. And, as
   everyone knows, self-deprecation is just about the funniest type of
--
   5. They care more about their interests than their appearance

   The fact that geeks have such a passionate interest in something means
   that they spend more time nurturing their brain than their appearance.
   Which makes them far more interesting, which, in turn, makes them loads
--
   7. They’re generally pretty damn smart

   It’s not often you encounter a dumb geek. They are either well-read and
   culturally aware, or scientific geniuses. Both are pretty damn sexy.

--
   (Picture: YouTube)

   This means that female geeks are confident and empowered (which makes
   for a very sexy woman) and the male geeks are totally comfortable with
   confident women (which makes for a very sexy man).

   9. They share many of your interests

   If you’re attracted to geeks, it’s probably because you’re one too.
   Which means that you have a lot in common with geeks. And there’s
   nothing sexier than a having an in-depth conversation about a shared
   passion.
--
   10. They’re considerate

   Geeks never grew up as the coolest kids. They know what it’s like to be
   on the outside looking in. This can make some geeks bitter (avoid them
   at all costs). But it makes most geeks sensitive, considerate and
   inclusive.

--
   comics 4

   OK, I know, poor eyesight is not a problem unique to geeks. But geeks
   are probably less likely to wear contact lenses than people who are
   actively trying to look cool. And glasses have that awesome Clark Kent
