   Fashion

Rise of the new geeks: how the outsiders won

   From superhero movies to techy sitcoms to captains of industry, geeks
   have been running the show for years. But now that 'geek chic' is in
   the dictionary, and Topshop is selling 'dork' T-shirts, what is the
   future for nerd culture?
   • The top 10 geek heroes, from Umberto Eco to Mary Berry
   Andrew Harrison
   Mon 2 Sep 2013 19.02 BST
--
   you're talking to someone who proudly attends PENN or NYU. Topshop
   brought out the three designs last Christmas, contestant Jordan Lee
   Davies wore the Geek shirt on The Voice in April, and they they were
   bootlegged quicker than you can say "gaga artpop torrentz". By spring
   they were unavoidable, seen on the chests of schoolkids, Ibiza ravers
   and TOWIE nitwits alike, worn by everyone apart from, well … geeks,
   nerds and dorks.

--
   or collector of BNIB original Transformer toys (pre-1990) would ever
   wear such a thing? They're so mainstream. By rights, the people who
   bought Topshop's geek tops and their knock-off market equivalents ought
   to be blinging it up in Hollister, SuperDry and Jack Wills as the Good
   Lord intended. A friend told me that seeing these shirts everywhere was
--
   Maybe the ouroboros of irony shirts is finally devouring its own tail.
   Or perhaps Reddit user KezzzMC of Warwickshire can put it more pithily:
   Geek chic: the g-word is now cool

   "Those T-shirts piss me off," he rage-typed shortly after Davies's
   appearance on The Voice, "mainly because throughout school me and my
   friends were called geeks, and now all the chavs that called us geeks
   have decided it'd be a good idea to start wearing them."

   Charming prole-bashing aside, you have to feel for him a little. But
   the triumph of the Topshop nerd top as the Frankie Say T-shirt of 2013
   is just the latest phase in the geeking of our culture. It's a massive
   reversal from the pre-digital 80s and 90s when geeks were friendless
   and marginal figures, ostracised in their Dungeons & Dragons groups,
   and their cousins in purgatory the nerds were so haplessly asocial that
   they became subjects of their own underdog movie Revenge of the Nerds –
   "it's time for the odd to get even!" – in 1984. (On points of
   etymology, there are differences between nerds and geeks but you really
   shouldn't let them bother you. Apparently geeks are collection-oriented
   and interested in the newest developments in their chosen micro-field,
   while nerds are achievement-oriented and "studiously intellectual". As
--
   alpha nerds such as Steve Jobs and Bill Gates to unprecedented power
   and influence. Then Hollywood rediscovered a rich stream of
   intellectual property and coincident nostalgia in geek touchstones Star
   Wars, Marvel Comics and JRR Tolkien at the turn of the century. Coding
   nerd Shawn Fanning overturned the music industry with Napster, a geek
   project extraordinaire. Celebs got in on the act, with R&B producers
   The Neptunes rebranding as N.E.R.D. and stars as unlikely as Justin
   Timberlake, David Beckham and Myleene Klass donning thick-rimmed specs
   in the mid-noughties. Sitcoms The IT Crowd and The Big Bang Theory set
   out to satirise a geek world that was becoming more visible and
   powerful – face it, can you fix your own PC? – but did so with a
   surprising measure of warmth, making unlikely heroes out of Reynham
--
   theoretical physicist Sheldon Cooper PhD.

   Now the phrase "geek chic" has been introduced into the Oxford English
   Dictionary – a decade late, but who's counting? – and editors at the
   rival Collins Dictionary are now tracking the very meaning of the word
   "geek" itself. Apparently it's changing before our eyes. According to
   Collins' Ian Brookes a geek is no longer a "boring and unattractive
   social misfit" and readers are "increasingly encountering the word in
   contexts other than computing, and with increasingly positive
--
   hobby four times as attractive in a person than good looks or dressing
   well. In your face, beautiful people! The name of Inferno's campaign?
   Geek Is Good.
   Nate Silver: statistics geek. Photograph: Jeremy Sutton-Hibbert/Getty
   Images

   Now the high end of the culture defers to geek-priests such as Malcolm
   "Tipping Point" Gladwell, Steven "Freakanomics" Levitt and statistician
   Nate Silver, surely the world's only functioning sports psephologist.
--
   they play in a retro band. And the best rock bands, such as British Sea
   Power and Pathé newsreel samplers Public Service Broadcasting, are
   geeks and proud, fuelled by wide-ranging obsessions including maritime
   history and birdwatching. Meanwhile, in our society's seedier reaches
   you will find wildly popular T-shirts featuring a succession of
   tired-looking Zoo and Nuts girls pouting in secretary glasses – because
   that's geek, yeah?

   What does it all mean? Has geek finally been absorbed and neutered, its
   network of rich and sustaining subcultures that were rooted in a real
   love of pop-culture minutiae and genuine expertise in matters technical
--
   with no lenses in them? Or has it, Borg-like, assimilated the
   mainstream and begun to subtly direct our world via its norms and
   memes? (Example: people actually know what memes are now.) Is geek just
   the post-noughties' fleeting equivalent of punk or lad culture, or does
   it mark a more fundamental realignment in our society? Above all, have
   we finally reached Peak Geek?

   Chris Coleman is head of print and graphics at fashion trend
--
   both an outlaw and a member of an elite.

   Being a geek is a sign of education," he says. "The working environment
   has become so harsh that young people think that if they're going to
   succeed they'll have to do it for themselves. Though geek first
   appeared as a kind of anti-fashion statement, it's becoming bound up
   with entrepreneurialism, self-motivation and independence instead of
--
   talks and Brian Cox – or even The Great British Bake Off – more than
   The X Factor. Someone calm and friendly but very knowledgeable like
   Mary Berry can be a geek hero too."

   Knowledge and craft, humility and enthusiasm … these are surprisingly
--
   scripted X-Men and Ultimate Fantastic Four as well as his own
   game-changing comics series The Authority and Transmetropolitan – the
   notion of geek culture itself is becoming outdated.
   Star Trek cosplayers at the 11th Annual Official Star Trek Convention
   in 2012 Photograph: Albert L Ortega/Getty Images

   "I find the term 'geek' weirdly disparaging and box-like for something
   that's so huge," he argues. "People will call Buffy the Vampire Slayer
   geek culture and yet it ran for seven years and is one of the most
   successful TV shows of all time. You could argue that superhero and
   fantasy movies are modern cinema. Geek hasn't beaten the mainstream,
   it's the new iteration of the mainstream. You don't have to buy a
   fanzine on mail order to be part of it any more. You can be part of a
--
   interest."

   Meanwhile in geek's other fiefdom – technology – the old
   nerdier-than-thou elitism is evaporating. The digital explosion has
   democratised technology. Ten years ago Ellis had to dismantle his phone
   and read a dozen websites in order to pull off certain communication
   tricks. An iPhone will now perform most of them out of the box. "It's
   not really geeky to use that level of technology any more," he says. "A
   16-year-old girl using SnapChat on her iPhone isn't a geek, she's a
   functioning modern teenager."

   In turn, as cheap technology advances it has colonised what used to be
   the mental playground of the geek world, science fiction itself. What
   used to take place in a Gollancz paperback now happens in the real
   world. "A lot of people are arguing that the science fiction novel is
--
   Book Of the Future [large PDF] did for 70s kids – but with added
   plausibility underpinned by hard design and science. Design fiction is
   where the geeks roll up their sleeves and it can be dazzling.

   You've heard of PayPal billionaire Elon Musk's planned
--
   own technologies and cultures. How would you like to live: as a
   Digitarian, a Communo-Nuclearist, an Anarcho-Evolutionist or a
   Bio-Liberal? Geek-driven ideas such as these liberate science,
   technology and philosophical ideas from the tedious necessity of having
   to carry a plot. As anyone who knows that Arthur C Clarke
   conceptualised the communication satellite before anyone built it
   understands, the true technology visionary thinks geek.

   This summer's Topshop T-shirts might be the most conspicuous indicator
   that our culture has been geeked. But it's a fashion moment and it will
   pass. Something deeper and more significant began taking shape in the
   90s, and it's making modern geek both broader and more robust than
   previous cultural waves: the advent of the Geek Girl.

   First digital culture and cyberpunk dragged geek out of its Simpsons
   Comic Book Guy dungeon, then internet business culture started to open
   up to self-motivated women with geeky inclinations. In turn Hollywood
   recognised that you can't build an entertainment blockbuster on half of
   the population. Geek culture is now powerfully feminised, from
   convention cosplay – there's enough material in all those Princess
   Leias to build countless theses on gender identity – to movie
   franchises that at least acknowledge that female viewers exist.
   Enabling it all is a thriving world of geek girl sites and blogs such
   as TheMarySue.com.

--
   female-dominated."

   Yet women coming into the geek world have found themselves on the wrong
   end of an ugly backlash from men who claim that they're "fake geeks"
   who are – irony within irony – only getting involved to win attention
   from geek boys. We've clearly reached some kind of end point when the
   sort of people who used to be shunned can now think of themselves as
   prize catches. "The idea of the fake geek girl, who pretends in order
   to get the attention of geek men, is harmful gatekeeping of the highest
   degree," says Polo. "Geeks should welcome people into our world.
   Otherwise it's geekier than thou and it's gross."

   Geekier than thou – who'd have thought it, that the weird values and
   introspective obsessions of this most despised subculture would
   suddenly become something to aspire to? Certainly not the novelist and
--
   I didn't mind. But it turns out that there are millions of people all
   over the world who share the same interests in pop culture and movies
   and video games. My whole life changed because of that geek culture."
   Ready Player One has now been translated into 22 languages.

   Cline thinks that the world going geek does not just represent a change
   from the achievement values of the 80s and 90s. It's more fundamental
   than that – it's the end of the 1950s-to-Reaganism Regular Joe mindset
--
   these nerdy, irresponsible scientists had let loose, and that was
   comforting. But in the 80s and 90s you can't sustain that. You see
   geeks like Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak and Bill Gates bring miracles into
   being, not least the internet which has changed everything. The geek
   becomes the hero."

   But don't the geeks' obsessions infantilise us in the long run?
   Superheroes, video games, fantasy novels, homebrew computing, movie
   trivia … these are all about retreating into the comforts of
   adolescence instead of facing the world as it is. If the future is
   geek-shaped then we're surely just locking ourselves away in the
   metaphorical bedroom.

--

   Perhaps escapism is what really matters. Maybe that's the reason that
   geek is displaying greater longevity and adaptability than previous
   cultural waves. Unlike punk, lad or dance culture, geek can take you
   out of your head into a fantasy environment, but its business
   institutions – Apple, Marvel/Disney, TED, MMPORGs and a thousand
   smaller entities – are robust enough to keep a grip on the real world.
   Geek has the ideas and the money, and it seems the staying power. Who
   can handle the demands of an ever-diversifying world without choosing
   one little area and mastering – or mistressing – it? It's all about the
   geek in me. Better get those horn-rimmed glasses on order. And make
   sure they've got lenses.
   {{#ticker}}
