   main image

Are geeks the new ʼcoolʼ?

   Ema Globyte
--
   While campaigners in Sweden are petitioning to change the definition of
   ‘nerd’ from ʼsimple-minded and laughable personʼ to something more
   positive, a question arises - have the words ‘nerd’ and ‘geek’ lost
   their derogatory connotations?

   When we say ‘geek’ these days, we tend to think of Mark Zuckerberg,
   Bill Gates and Steve Jobs – people who have made billions with their
   high-tech miracles, and are greatly admired by many.

   Referring to some celebrities as ʼgeeksʼ nowadays is a frequent
   occurrence, while geek-themed books are on must-read lists.

   Even Chris Kluwe, who has been voted the “sexiest man of the year”, has
   publicly identified himself as a ‘nerd’.

We wanted to know how Labs participants defined the term ‘geek’, and whether
they thought being a ‘geek’ has become cool.

Here’s what we found…

   The responses of our Labs participants showed that there is definitely
   a shift in societal attitudes towards ‘geekiness’, as most participants
   gladly identified themselves as ‘geeks’.

   Those who identified themselves as geeks defined being a ‘geek’ as
   being technology-savvy, academic, actively using social media and
   modern, which are evidently not negative connotations.

   However, some participants did not identify themselves as geeks, and
   defined a ‘geek’ as someone who spends all of his/her time in front of
   a computer and ‘speaks, breaths and lives’ for technology.

Has it become ‘cool’ to be a geek?

   We also asked participants whether they think it has become cool to be
   a ‘geek’.

Most thought that is has become ‘cool’ to be a ʼgeekʼ.

   A number of reasons were given, one of them being that ‘geeky’
   interests changed from academia to more widely acceptable subjects such
   as gaming.
--
   they are increasing their chances of getting better paid jobs.

A parallel was drawn between being a ‘geek’ and being successful.

   Participants said that people such as Mark Zuckerberg and Steve Jobs as
   role models for younger generation.

However, some participants did not think it has become ‘cool’ to be a geek,
saying that people who could be considered ‘geeks’ are still ridiculed for
their niche interests.

   Some participants mentioned that it has become a trend many follow, but
   that it is not ‘cool to be someone you are not’. Plus, others thought
   that to dress like a geek has become cool, while to actually be a
   ‘geek’ hasn’t.

Participants who identified themselves as geeks

     * Interestingly, most Labs participants identified themselves as
       geeks. Their definitions of a ‘geek’ mentioned niche interests,
       knowledge of technology and social media, as well as not following
       mainstream trends and interests.
--

   “I like niche things and some things that are traditionally considered
   geeky and I often value these things over social life. I read, use
   social media, like technology and "geeky" stuff like sci-fi, genre
   fiction, fantasy and more” Anon, London

--

   “I like niche things and some things that are traditionally considered
   geeky and I often value these things over social life. I read, use
   social media, like technology and "geeky" stuff like sci-fi, genre
   fiction, fantasy and more” London

   “Persons interested in science and technology, comics, anime, gaming.
   Geeks are people who have an interest in ʼfringeʼ topics but have
   better social skills and can be modern and cool” Anon

Participants who did not identify themselves as geeks

     * Many participants who did not identify themselves as geeks defined
       geeks as very technology-focused.

   “Somebody who spends all there time on computers. I work with them
--
   technology without looking at the other wonderful things the world has
   to offer” Ian H, Warlingham
     * Some believed that being a geek has become a trend and a fashion
       statement more than a lifestyle, and is more mainstream these days
       than standing out from the crowd.

   “The meaning has become blurred. It has become trendy and fashionable
   to be a geek so more people think they identify as one. It is
   especially frustrating to see so many people wearing those large fake
   glasses - stop it now!” Nigel, Holmfirth
     * Other participants associated being a geek with being good at maths
       and science.

   “I do not have the skills or mathematical knowledge to consider myself
   a geek or nerd. Wish I did though” Anon

   “Iʼm not cool, but both of those I associate with people into maths or
   science, which Iʼm awful at” Anon

Participants who thought that being a ‘geek’ has become cool

   “The usual interests of geeks has changed from academic to more widely
   acceptable pursuits like gaming” Anon

--
   idealised version of a nerd though; someone who is just quiet, not
   particularly sociable and studious is never going to be considered
   particularly cool. It depends on the definition of geek or nerd” Anon

   “To a certain extent itʼs become more mainstream so more people are
   doing it. Not everything "geeky" is now cool, but thereʼs a level of
   cultural acceptance and curiosity about things that has made it cooler”
   London

   “I was bullied all the way through school for being a ʼgeekʼ… Now
   people need my skills and I earn more than those that put me down.
   Finally society might be starting to realise that what is important is
   dedication, skills and intellect and not physical strength or how many
   women you can sleep with” Anon
     * Some participants said that TV shows featuring ‘geeky’ characters
       have added to making being a ‘geek’ more mainstream.

   “The likes of Doctor Who and The Big Bang Theory have popularised
   geekiness with the general public” Alexander, Somerset

   “Programmes like the Big Bang Theory have popularised nerds, and the
--
   flying nerds (Steve Jobs et al) have removed the stigma” Hove

Participants who said that being a ‘geek’ has not become ‘cool’

     * Some participants believed that it has not become cool to be a
       ‘geek’, as many people are still ‘ridiculed’ for niche interests.

   “People are still ridiculed if they donʼt share popular opinions,
   interests etc.” Anon
     * Some thought that there is a difference between what it’s like to
       be a ‘geek’ in reality, and in TV shows, as people who are
       introverted and have ‘nerdy interests’ are judged.

--
   still arenʼt very open about it. As real nerds are often introverted,
   we do still get some stick just because of that” Anon
     * Others believed that being a ‘geek’ has become a label, and many
       are only pretending to be one as it is a trend.

--
   youʼre not” Calvin T, Huddersfield

   “I still think that the majority of people do not accept geeks or nerds
   but think that ʼgeek-chicʼ is definitely becoming popular” Anon

   “It has become "cool" to dress in a particular way that is associated
   to the stereotypical image of a nerd or geek because this suggests you
   are wacky, and therefore (apparently) creative and spontaneous. It
   hasnʼt become cool to be a geek or a nerd; there are simply some young
   people who feel that it is cool to play up to an image of being wacky
   or weird and, presumably, the way to do this is to conform to a fashion
   trend” Liam

Do you identify yourself as a geek? Has it become ʼcoolʼ to be one?

Share your thoughts below
