    #Old Gold & Black RSS 2.0 Old Gold & Black RSS .92 Old Gold & Black
   Atom 0.3 Old Gold & Black » Examining the rise of nerd culture Comments
   Feed alternate alternate alternate

--
               o Life

Examining the rise of nerd culture
            Nerds have made their way into popular culture over recent
            years
            Elements+of+nerd+culture%2C+like+Dungeons+and+Dragons+remain+m
            arginalized.
            Courtesy of Review Geek
            Elements of nerd culture, like “Dungeons and Dragons” remain
            marginalized.
            Josie Scratchard, Life Editor
            February 24, 2022
             Not too long ago, a nerd was considered to be someone who
            read comic books, obsessed over “The Lord of the Rings” and
            spent afternoons at the arcade. Nerds were harassed constantly
            for their hobbies to the point that many kept them hidden.
            However, the last few decades have unraveled the seclusion of
            nerd culture, carrying these hobbies and subjects into
            mainstream territory for everyone to enjoy.
            With the production of “Star Wars” (1977) and “Superman: The
--
            (CGI) coupled with never-before-seen action sequences lured
            audiences of all different interests to the previously
            fabricated realm of nerdom.
            As computers and other electronic devices entered into the
            equation, video games became a new force on the market.
            Consoles like the Nintendo NES and Atari took over household
            television auxiliary ports, blurring the lines of the common
            entertainment consumer and the traditional nerd. Nowadays, you
            can catch almost anyone planning to see the new Marvel movie
            on opening weekend, playing Xbox or geeking out over Star Wars
            Land — the stigma has diminished tremendously.
            Mainstream media and popular culture both have played a large
            role in the popularization of traditionally nerdy activities.
            This makes them more palatable to the average person. After
            all, if Jason Mamoa is willing to put on tights to breathe
--
            front of their screens.
            As popular and beloved actors and actresses line up to portray
            characters from comic books and “nerdy” literature, nerd
            culture becomes permissible in society. There’s no denying the
            nerdy paradigm was one of a skinny boy with a collared shirt
            and glasses, so once that notion goes by the wayside, people
            are able to run rampant with their new, socially acceptable
            interests.
            Although nerd culture has spread to the masses and become far
            less stigmatized, there are still elements that are vilified.
            Games like “Dungeons and Dragons” and “World of Warcraft”
            remain tethered to the image of the outcasted nerd, and the
            normal person can never dare to cross that threshold without
            fear of social defamation. Why is this the case?
            Popular culture hasn’t even dared to touch the deeper
            dimensions of nerd culture. If the subject can’t be turned
            into a movie or show, it probably won’t ever be considered
            worthy outside the world of nerds.
            Despite this, nerds don’t really seem to care. Many people who
            have found their place in nerd culture have become gatekeepers
            of their beloved hobbies.
            For instance, many fans of Robert Jordan’s “The Wheel of Time”
--
            they hold a strong sense of entitlement for their dedication
            to the series.
            In fact, some nerds are so protective over their favorite
            stories and hobbies that they gatekeep them even when
            conversing with fellow nerds. They’ll ask them painfully
            specific questions regarding their knowledge of the nerdy
            topic in order to confirm their depth of interest in the
            subject.
            What many nerds fail to realize is that if their activities
            were represented in popular culture and enjoyed by more people
            they would also become less stigmatized. More people would be
            accepting of — and even take part in — events like Comic-Con
            and the reading of comic books.
            But maybe some elements of nerd culture are meant to be
            secluded from the majority of society. Maybe nerds like living
            in their sheltered world of hobbies because it is simpler than
            attempting to relate to those who simply “like” something
            instead of completely immersing themselves in it. Maybe nerd
            culture is destined to remain as such, instead of melding with
            popular culture.
--
            conducted on here and based careful and sound research because
            most of these so called experts would always assume that all
            nerd culture is all about being a overachiever based on the
            stereotype of a nerd in popular culture and that is actually
            misleading because in you what said about nerd culture is more
            about like the kind of media and academics that`s what makes
            nerd culture based on what you said
            Reply (BUTTON) Recommend (BUTTON) Share
            https://wfuogb.com/15380/life/examining-the-rise-of-nerd-cultu
            re/#comment-1455
