   Culture

What Happens When Society Decides That Nerds Are Dangerous?

   By Fred Nadis
--

   In Sam Peckinpah’s 1971 movie Straw Dogs, Dustin Hoffman plays an
   ineffectual intellectual, a mathematician, indeed, a nerd, who moves
   with his alluring wife to her hometown, in England. Local rowdies
   continually harass them, until Hoffman’s character executes a violent
   revenge.

   The words “nerd” and “violent” do not usually go hand in hand, but the
   harmlessness of nerds is hardly a settled formula. Along with severe
   emotional disturbance, likely psychosis, and a slowly festering
   decision to carry out the rampage that ended in the deaths of six
   students, as well as his own on May 23 in Isla Vista, California,
   Elliot Rodger, for most of his life, fit the mold of a “nerd.” In his
   manifesto, “My Twisted World,” he noted that video games were his only
   refuge growing up: “I immersed myself entirely into my online games
--

   Among recent murderers and would-be murderers, Rodger wasn’t alone in
   his nerdish pastimes. The Newtown Connecticut school shooter, Adam
   Lanza, even more of a loner than Rodger, was addicted to video games,
   including one creepy offering called School Shooting. Two 12-year-old
--

   After the Isla Vista killings, commentators quickly linked Rodger’s
   worldview to his lifelong embrace of nerd-culture offerings such as
   Pokémon, Halo, Star Wars, World of Warcraft, and Game of Thrones.
   Arthur Chu, a former Jeopardy quiz-show champion, judged the mass
--
   graphics and storylines encourage a more general “rape culture.” He
   concluded it was time for fellow geeks to “grow up” and throw aside the
   sense of entitlement nerd culture engenders.

   This is hardly the first time nerdiness has become associated with
   aberrant behavior. History, however, suggests that nerd panics
   generally say less about geek communities than they do about the people
   doing the panicking—and the uncertainty of the times.
--
   rock ’n’ roll proved useful.

   A similar social panic centered on the otaku (or nerd) subculture in
   the late 1980s in Japan. Otaku made and swapped amateur manga (comic
   books) some of which were parodies, others featured romances between
--
   fretted that the “Otaku Tribe” was rotting society.

   Such stigmatizing overlooks the fact that nerd culture may just as
   likely provide therapeutic havens as pathological outposts. U.S. nerd
   culture’s origin traces to the science-fiction fan culture that began
   in the mid-1920s. This subculture, which provided a refuge for brainy
--
   Starship Enterprise, the early community of fans was welcoming. Ray
   Palmer, a longtime editor of Amazing Stories, and an early organizer of
   nerd culture, was hunchbacked and stood just over four feet tall, but
   was lampooned for his chatty writing style and braggadocio—not his
   disabilities. While not “out” in the 1940s, some of the young devotees
--
   making it hard for “we” to find an “us.” In traditional Chinese
   culture, straw dogs were fashioned to serve as burned sacrifices in
   worship. Nerds have become, temporarily, a species of straw dog relied
   on in the ceremony to protect our dream of unity.

