   Brain flappingScience and scepticism

The brutal oppression of the Nerds and the Geeks

   The use of the term ‘nerd’ doesn’t quite match the terrible history of
   the ‘n-word’, despite what some people might say
   Matt Berry, Katherine Parkinson, Richard Ayoade, Chris O'Dowd from the
--
   hats off to him.

   He also said that using the terms “nerd” or “geek” to describe people
   is the same as using the worst of racial slurs. His actual quote is “I
   feel these words are as insulting as nigger.” This, many would probably
--

   Whether or not the term “boffin” is disparaging has been discussed here
   before, but to compare geek and nerd to the N-word? Granted, geek and
   nerd have been used in the past as disparaging, insulting terms, nobody
   is questioning that. They may have taken on more positive meanings in
   modern times, you even see people (ie women) being mocked and
   criticised for not being “real” geeks.

   But if geek and nerd have been “reclaimed” as many would argue, it
   illustrates that they needed to be reclaimed in the first place. Nobody
   deserves to be mocked, bullied or shunned purely because they have an
--
   that this happened so often (and still regularly does) is a bad thing.

   But to compare “nerd” and “geek” to the most offensive of racial
   epithets is surely ridiculous? You may think so, but what you’re
   overlooking is the fact that this isn’t just some random opinion; it’s
   a wealthy middle-aged white man’s opinion! Ergo, it must be considered
   in all seriousness. And, if you look into the tragic and brutal history
   experienced by geeks and nerds over the centuries, you will see that it
   is a very fair comparison.

   There are many different explanations for the differences between nerds
   and geeks, but the truth is the terms are interchangeable. The terms
   come from the fact that nerds and geeks originate from what was known
   as the country of Nerdrovia, located in the Geekistan sea, hence the
   two names were used by the different colonial powers in play at the
   time the Geek and Nerd people were “discovered”, and have since become
   common.

   Nerdrovia is a large island but the treacherous Geekistan sea prevents
   easy crossing, so the indigenous population was essentially stuck to
   their island, meaning accelerated morphological evolution. Nerdrovia
   has many strange properties, which resulted in many bizarre features
   that shaped the development of the Nerd and Geek people. The volatile
   geology and unusual weathering led to spontaneous formation of natural
   laboratories and studios, where the people could study and create
--
   there.

   Sadly, the European empires eventually discovered Nerdrovia, and
   immediately saw the potential use of the intellectual but physically
   unintimidating natives. The first explorers to arrive sometime in the
--
   gunpoint to design better and more efficient guns, as these first ones
   weren’t too reliable, and then they took those better guns and started
   rounding up nerds and geeks for export to the home nations.

   Nerdrovia quickly became a battleground as the rival empires sought to
   exploit its useful population and natural resources. Nerds and Geeks
   were scattered across mainland Europe, where they were ruthlessly put
   to work, inventing things and working out complicated problems for the
   various governments and ruling parties. Given their tendencies and
   abilities, Nerds and Geeks weren’t recognised as actual people and were
   usually classed as “a type of abacus”, having no legal rights
   whatsoever.

   As such, it was not uncommon for wealthier individuals or families to
   have several Geeks and Nerds living in their mansions, working in
   cramped custom-made labs and workshops to invent amusing things for
   their “hosts”. Despite their abilities, Nerds and Geeks could regularly
   expect to have their pants pulled up over their heads, or be made to
   sit on their own in the lunch room.

   This continued for some considerable time, until societal changes led
   to Geeks and Nerds being recognised as individuals, with rights and
   some measure of dignity. Despite this, considerable prejudice remained.
   Geeks and Nerds were barred from holding high-level jobs or from
   marrying outside their communities. They were regularly ghettoised,
   forced to live in unhygienic but surprisingly efficient slums. Given
   their marginalised position in society, Geeks and Nerds regularly fell
   inwards and turned on each other, leading to lasting and bloody
   disputes over minor details in celebrated works of science fiction.

   Maybe these days the terms nerd and geek have been reclaimed and can be
   used affectionately, but they still stem from the terrible legacy of
   what the Geeks and the Nerds went through to get to this point.

   When you consider all this, then Harding is right to compare geek and
   nerd to the most offensive of racial terms. Because if everything
   written above is total and utter gibberish, then Harding has
   effectively said that minor-to-moderate social rejection is the same as
