   #Code? Boom. » Feed Code? Boom. » Comments Feed Code? Boom. » Is the
   word “geek” offensive? Comments Feed alternate alternate Code? Boom.
   WordPress.com

--
   Exploring interesting ways of learning about Computer Science

Is the word “geek” offensive?

   Posted bycodeboomSeptember 16, 2012September 16, 2012Posted
   inUncategorizedTags:chic, culture, geek, offensive, word

   Yesterday morning I had an interesting tweet conversation with
   @ianskenny about the word “geek” after I had mentioned @mcrgirlgeeks in
   a previous tweet. His opinion is as follows:

     I find the word ‘geek’ particularly unhelpful…   because I believe
     it’s an ‘excluding’ word that doesn’t attract modern young girls, or
     boys. It’s used pejoratively…   It’s not about how existing ‘geeks’
     feel about it, it’s about how it’s perceived in the wider world,
     particularly youth.
--

   I looked on dictionary.com and found this definition of the word
   ‘geek’:

     1. a computer expert or enthusiast
--
   “that’s gay” meaning “that’s annoying/bad”. So should we change the
   word “gay” to something else just because some people use it in a
   negative way? I don’t see why, and I don’t see why geeks should either.
   Wikipedia’s article on “Geek” says:

     Although often considered as a pejorative, the term is also often
--

   When I was at school the word was “boff” (short for boffin).  If we
   were to stop using the word geek, someone would just add negative
   connotations to whatever the alternative is. You can’t stop this, so
   you might as well embrace it.

   2. Geek is a culture

   Watch any American high school movie and you will see the stereotypical
--
   that their interest in sport alone is enough to weather anything they
   might be called because of it? Maybe we should be teaching our children
   to say “thank you” when they are called a geek, rather than to be upset
   by it.

   I was interested to read this article on geek culture the other day
   which talks of the new “geek chic” which seems to be taking over. My
   boss has “geek glasses” and so do half of the clothing models on Asos.
   I think it is good for students who are interested in computers,
   science and intellectual pursuits to have a culture where they feel
   like they belong. As the article says “many people are drawn to the
   geek identity precisely because they enjoy inhabiting a niche
   “outsider” role. It’s a way of eschewing the mainstream” – for some
   this may be more by accident than design, but why deny them the chance
   of identifying with others by outlawing the term ‘geek’?

   3. Objections to geeks are not actually about geeks

   I often read the tweets of Belinda Parmar and @ladygeektv containing
   snippets of things people have said in their book out soon (I’m in
   it…unless they cut my bit :S). Most of the objections from kids seem to
   be about things such as (and I’m paraphrasing) “geeks don’t want to go
   outside” or “geeks have wild crazy hair” or “geeks don’t wash”. Surely
   these characteristics are actually nothing to do with what the geek
   identity is all about – computers, not being mainstream and being
   intellectual. You are allowed to like computers and still wash. Hell, I
   straighten my hair and read Cosmopolitan, does that mean I have to
   revoke my membership of geekdom? I’m pretty sure most people would
   object to anyone who didn’t wash, whether they were interested in
   computers or not, so why lump it in as a characteristic of being a
   geek?

   I think we (the older geeks) need to show the younger generation that
   it’s cool to be clever. It’s OK to have an interest in Computing – and
   not because we look or behave a certain way or refer to ourselves as a
--

   Posted bycodeboomSeptember 16, 2012September 16, 2012Posted
   inUncategorizedTags:chic, culture, geek, offensive, word

Post navigation
--
   Python Gangnam Style!

One thought on “Is the word “geek” offensive?”

    1.
   mrgict says:
       September 17, 2012 at 5:47 pm
       i think geek is a good word. i am proud to be a geek. i think it is
       important you sell geek as a cool and have people in schools who
       people see as geeky but cool. dare i say it but big bang theory has
       done a lot for that cause as( the first series at least) was
       intelligent and funny.
