   #alternate The Black Nerds Redefining the Culture

   (BUTTON)
--
   Today’s Paper

   T Magazine|The Black Nerds Redefining the Culture
   https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/24/t-magazine/black-nerds-culture.html
     * (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
--
   social studies

The Black Nerds Redefining the Culture

   By pushing back against centuries-old stereotypes, a historically
--

   “Illustrating superheroes requires imagination, but drawing a Black
   nerd merely requires a mirror,” says the Atlanta-based comic book
   artist Brian Stelfreeze, who created these panels for T. “I remember
   organizing Dungeons &amp; Dragons campaigns as if they were late-night
   Prohibition speakeasies, but now it’s a badge you can wear proudly.”
   “Illustrating superheroes requires imagination, but drawing a Black
   nerd merely requires a mirror,” says the Atlanta-based comic book
   artist Brian Stelfreeze, who created these panels for T. “I remember
   organizing Dungeons & Dragons campaigns as if they were late-night
--
   talk. “I thought we were having the talk about being Black in America,”
   he recalls. “Oh, no. You already know all that,” she told him. “I’m
   talking about you being such a big nerd!” In Holmon’s room, in the
   dresser drawers where his clothes should have been, he kept
   sequentially ordered issues of Daredevil and Green Lantern comics. He
--
   Two decades later, Holmon, now 36 and based in Brooklyn, is happily
   married and the co-founder, along with William Evans, 41, of the
   website Black Nerd Problems. Their book of the same title will be
   published this summer. Both projects excavate the territory of nerd
   culture — comics, anime, e-sports, tabletop gaming, science fiction,
   fantasy and more — from a Black perspective that the broader nerd
   community has historically overlooked or, worse still, outright
   attacked.

   The pair are part of a new generation of Black nerds (or “Blerds,” as
   it is sometimes styled, a portmanteau of “Black” and “nerds”): critics
   and creators, scholars and social influencers, artists and activists
   who are shifting the culture in the years following the election of
--
   moment seems to have only just begun.

   But being Black and nerdy hasn’t always been so glamorous. Black comic
   book fans report suspicious white store owners trailing them in shops.
   At Comic-Cons, Black cosplayers are sometimes chastised by officious
--

   Image
   Touchstones of Black nerd culture include DC’s “New Gods” series
   (1984).Credit...Courtesy of DC
   Image
--
   Kirby.Credit...Courtesy of DC

   The tension is this: Black nerds unsettle the myth of a monolithic
   Blackness. In an American imagination that has historically stereotyped
   Black people as alternately ignorant and emotional or sexualized and
   cool, the nerd — smart and cerebral, unsexy and decidedly uncool —
   creates cognitive dissonance. Not only do Black nerds confound racist
   stereotypes, they also pierce the protective orthodoxy of Blackness
   passed down in the United States across generations. Under slavery and
--
   thing? Certainly not Black individuals, who, like all individuals, are
   complex amalgams of shifting affinities, of inherited and chosen
   identities. And certainly not Black nerds, whose very existence is
   often rendered invisible because they present an inconvenient
   complication to a straightforward story of Blackness in America.
--
   guys (and they are nearly always white and nearly always guys) bullied
   in 1980s cult classic films: think Robert Carradine’s Lewis Skolnick
   from “Revenge of the Nerds” (1984) and Crispin Glover’s George McFly
   from “Back to the Future” (1985). This is Nerd 1.0. The Nerd 1.0
   archetype has its variants, perhaps the most prominent being the East
   Asian nerd (the flip side to the stereotypical martial-arts action
   hero), portrayed with model-minority bookishness, either sexless or
   sex-crazed, like Gedde Watanabe’s Long Duk Dong from “Sixteen Candles”
   (1984). Though Nerd 1.0 might seem easy to dismiss as an all in good
   fun comic figure, its influence has lingered in the typecasting faced
   by both East Asian and South Asian actors to this day. But over the
   decades, the term “nerd” has undergone a dramatic evolution — some
   would call it a corruption. Once the defiant moniker of the brainy
   social outcast, nerd is now claimed by anyone with a deep affinity for
   some area of knowledge. Call it Nerd 2.0. Sneakerheads are nerds now,
   obsessing over tooling and the vicissitudes of the secondary sales
   market. So are cannabis connoisseurs, with encyclopedic knowledge of
   different strains and the legal highs they produce. “Nerd is not an
   othering anymore; it’s a spectrum,” Holmon says.

   The most famous fictional Black nerd, Steve Urkel, portrayed for nine
   seasons starting in 1989 by the actor Jaleel White on the sitcom
   “Family Matters,” is decidedly Nerd 1.0. He wears high-water pants with
   suspenders; his enormous eyeglasses are secured to his head by a strap.
   Clumsy and irrepressible, his running gag relies on him disrupting the
--
   exhausting and endearing, which explains how he went from a supporting
   character to the star of the show. Reprise his role in 2021, however,
   and you’d likely fill it with a Nerd 2.0: perhaps a young Questlove,
   the polymathic drummer of the Roots, or a teenage Daveed Diggs, the
   Grammy and Tony Award-winning actor and recording artist who now has a
--
   Image
   “This work is a meditation on the stylistic attributes that have become
   emblematic in nerd fashion,” says the Brooklyn-based artist Troy
   Michie, who made this original collage for T. “Using the character of
   Steve Urkel as a reference, the work starts to unfold, complicating the
--
   from The Atlantic in 2018 if she saw her character as the natural Blerd
   evolution from Urkel, Rae pushed back. “I never identified my character
   as nerdy, because the classic cultural nerd — the gamer, the ‘Star
   Wars’ or sci-fi or ‘Lord of the Rings’ geek — just never interested
   me,” she said. Instead, she sought to explore the “in-between” of Black
--
   doesn’t stop Blerds from embracing her and her show: “I don’t know if
   she realizes that she made such an impact on Black girls who call
   themselves nerds,” says Jamie Broadnax, 40, the Virginia Beach-based
   founder of the online community Black Girl Nerds.

   Nerds are the cool kids now, and it’s not because they’ve changed all
   that much; after all, a big part of being a nerd is a stubborn
   insistence on the eccentricities of one’s passions and personality.
   Rather, cool itself has changed. In an increasingly fragmented media
--
   stigmatized. Communities build up around affinities, connecting people
   through social media platforms that foster the rapid exchange of ideas
   — or, more succinctly put, are conducive to nerding out. Coolness also
   follows power, and great power now rests in sectors of society,
   particularly in technology, where nerds have traditionally thrived.

   “Nerds hold the keys to the castle,” says Terril “Rell” Fields, the
   33-year-old founder of the Raleigh, N.C.-based blerd.com. Growing up,
   Fields was “almost stereotypically nerdy.” Before he got contact lenses
   for sports, he wore huge glasses with one lens thicker than the other
   to correct the vision in his weaker eye. “And I was at the lunch table
--
   thousands of hours spent gaming, flipping through comic books and
   watching anime. “Blerds still love the same types of content [as other
   nerds],” he says. “A Blerd just sees nerd culture through their Black
   cultural lens.” They may notice things that other nerds don’t: a Black
   or brown supporting character in a comic book that might otherwise be
   forgotten; a political allegory of race and democracy played out in a
   sci-fi television series.

   When it comes to finding distinct points of entry into nerd culture,
   Blerds are not alone. Disability, long a theme in these realms —
   whether through Professor Charles Xavier and his X-Men or
   neurodiversity in science fiction — is also a defining facet of the new
   nerd culture, with fans pushing for accessibility in gaming and greater
   inclusion at Comic-Cons. Queer and trans nerds are also increasingly
   visible and, along racial lines, Indiginerds claim space, as do Latina
   and Asian subsets of the universe. Bao Phi, who grew up a
   self-described “Vietnamese ghetto refugee nerd” in Minnesota’s Twin
   Cities, wrote a column in 2010 for the Star Tribune that inspired the
   website thenerdsofcolor.org, which now brings together a cross-racial
   coalition.

   But for many of the Black nerds coming of age in the past two decades,
   the term “Blerd” was a lifeline. It cast a protective spell, offering a
   covert way for Black fans to connect and communicate in spaces that
--
   of a 1991 TV Guide.Credit...TV Guide/Courtesy of Everett Collection

   A BRIEF HISTORY of Black nerds dates back to before the Revolutionary
   War, to Phillis Wheatley, the young Black woman born a slave who was
   the first person of African descent to publish a collection of English
--
   respectable characters in Boston,” as the 18 white men described
   themselves in a note “To the Public” that introduces her “Poems on
   Various Subjects, Religious and Moral” (1773). The Black nerd also
   lives in the pages of Charles W. Chesnutt, whose short-story collection
   “The Conjure Woman” (1899) reads like a late 19th-century iteration of
--
   grandmother’s house as kids laying on the floor, her writing and me
   drawing and ultimately clinging together because we didn’t feel like we
   fit in.” That sense is common to Black nerds, particularly among those
   who grew up before there was a name to call themselves. “I was in my
   30s before I heard the word ‘Blerd.’ And I thought, ‘That would have
--
   Image
   The title page of “Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral”
   (1773) by Phillis Wheatley, a foundational Black nerd.Credit...Rare
   Book and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress, Washington,
   D.C.
--
   That’s us. That’s part of our culture.”

   MICA BURTON IS a nerd renaissance woman: an e-sports host, cosplay
   model, anime aficionado and Dungeons & Dragons player. She’s also
   fluent in Elvish, a constructed language J.R.R. Tolkien introduced in
--

   Burton, 26 and based in Los Angeles, is not a Blerd, she tells me, but
   a nerd who happens to be Black. “I’m not trying to assimilate,
   necessarily, but I’m trying to exist in space without purposefully
   stating that I’m different,” she explains. This resistance to the Blerd
--
   in their 20s and younger who don’t like the term,” Horne says. “They
   say, ‘I don’t understand why we have to call ourselves something
   different. Why can’t you just be a nerd?’ I laugh because I’m like,
   ‘I’m so happy that you feel that there are so many of us that we don’t
   have to say it anymore.’” Blerd or nerd, the challenge is the same: to
   be at home in the worlds of one’s choosing. “My entire purpose of my
   career is to be the representation I didn’t have as a kid,” Burton
--
   of Grand Central Publishing

   When Burton was a kid, her nerd tendencies were fostered by a
   supportive family. By elementary school, she and her father were
   playing video games together, sharing a passion for fantasy and
--
   late ’80s and early ’90s and the host of PBS’s long-running children’s
   series “Reading Rainbow” is something like the patron saint of Black
   nerds. Early on, though, Mica set out on her own path. “She’s always
   been a ‘Star Wars’ fan over ‘Star Trek,’” says LeVar, 64 and also based
   in Los Angeles. That stubborn streak has served her well as she’s
   pushed to clear a path for nerds like herself — a self-identified cis
   female Black bisexual — in spaces that sometimes don’t know what to do
   with her or, worse still, are actively hostile to her presence. “I
--
   Hopkinson to Nnedi Okorafor and Suyi Davies Okungbowa. “It was really
   my love of science fiction that put me squarely in the category [of
   Black nerd], even at a young age,” LeVar says. “For a young Black kid
   growing up in Sacramento in the late ’60s, it was preferable to imagine
   other worlds and other ways of existing that did not involve racial
--
   portrayal of Lieutenant Nyota Uhura, he and other Black viewers could
   see themselves as part of a future that seemed far from promised in the
   present. Uhura represented the first phase of advancement in Black nerd
   culture: representation. That representation is particularly profound
   for Black women. “Uhura is my spirit character: a Black woman at the
--
   Pressley is described by her friend Aisha Francis, the scholar and
   activist, as the consummate Blerd. You can see it in music. Lizzo, who
   plays the flute, was a proud band nerd in high school and used that
   outsider energy to define her distinctive, chart-topping style. And
   Janelle Monáe once joined Chester French on a 2009 song called “Nerd
   Girl,” on which she sings, “I’m your nerd girl / Reading comics in the
   dark / My favorite station’s NPR.” Now she’s the inspiration for
   Jemisin’s heroine Sojourner “Jo” Mullein in the “Far Sector”
--
   Archive/Courtesy of Everett Collection

   You can see Black women nerds’ influence most especially on television.
   Jessica Williams and Phoebe Robinson, the podcasting duo behind “2 Dope
   Queens,” dedicated an episode of their 2018 HBO live performances to
   the topic of Blerds. “What are you nerdy about?” Williams asks one of
   their guests, the actress Uzo Aduba, who responds with a rhapsodic
   reverie on Ms. Pac-Man and Mortal Kombat. With “Lovecraft Country,” the
--
   predominantly Black cast to imagine a fantasy world still in touch with
   our own. These Black women creators represent the next phase in the
   evolution of Black nerd culture, advancing past representation alone to
   creative ownership. “It’s got to be more than putting a face on the
   screen, it’s got to be authority,” says Broadnax of Black Girl Nerds.
   “Black people being in positions of power.”

--
   Black woman millions of dollars to create the HBO show that was
   ‘Lovecraft Country,’” Horne explains. These successful works of public
   art and entertainment are matters of personal consequence for nerds —
   and Black nerds in particular — who suddenly find their passions
   vindicated. As Horne puts it, “I wasn’t considered mainstream until
   2018.”

   The triumph of “Black Panther” helps explain the ascendancy of Black
   nerds today. The film created an opportunity for undercover Blerds to
   test out their nerdish tendencies in public. Mica Burton witnessed “the
   feeling of safety among Black people to say, ‘I read comic books. I
   watch anime. I like Marvel films,’” she says. If your friends were cool
--
   that’s how communities are formed.”

   THE FUTURE OF Black nerds is the future of the retro: a return to the
   timeworn techniques of storytelling. In a graphic novel or a video
   game, a Netflix series or a role-playing campaign, you can take things
   for granted — like racial and ethnic diversity, like equality along the
   spectra of gender and sexual orientation — that the world beyond is
   somehow still deliberating. These nerdish things offer freedom for
   self-fashioning that has historically been denied to Black Americans by
   a racist imaginary that insisted on projecting Black people in ways
   that served white supremacist fantasy and power. Black nerd culture
   rejects the grotesque menagerie of racist stereotypes, as well as the
   compensatory images of Black cool, by insisting on the full and
--
   author giving voice to a young Black protagonist claiming that he might
   speak for you — whomever you may be — was indeed a wild fantasy. Nearly
   70 years later, Black nerds, Blerds and dreamers everywhere are doing
   the same: daring to speak for a culture that needs their voices now
   more than ever.
