     *

‘Please Don’t Beat Me Up’ nerd rails against bullying advice

   Published 1:28 PM EDT, Wed October 12, 2011
--
   golf course in 1990.

   Adam J. Ruben, a comedian, writer and scientist, has been called a nerd
   for most of his life. Does he fit the bill? Probably.

--
   The show started out as an act of commiseration with peers, fashioned
   primarily as a comedy. “Most of it is joking about how lame we all were
   and how nerdy we were and looking at it now from this side,” Ruben
   said. But it does expose the pain of growing up in America as a nerd.

   “I don’t think any of the nerds at my school had that one day where
   they stood up to the bully and the bully backed down, like that scene
   in ‘The Christmas Story’ where Ralphie Parker stands up to Scut Farkus
--
   because no good solution to the problem has been found.

   “Society has this expectation that nerds are people to be bullied and
   made fun of,” Ruben said. “I would get mad every time there was a TV
   show that had nerd characters on it and they always had thick glasses
   with tape in the middle and they were in the chess club, and it became
   perfectly OK to make fun of them.

   “It made me very angry because being a nerd was not something that I
   chose, and it was not something that I was proud of, and it was not
   something I could change,” he said.

   The social pressures of being bullied makes nerds turn on one another,
   he said.

--
   “In the same way on a TV show that the stupid character is not
   self-aware, and you laugh when the stupid character says something
   stupid, you laugh at the nerd not being self-aware, and saying things
   that may be inappropriately intelligent for the situation or
   inappropriately detailed,” he said.

   It’s a bit of a romantic notion for nerds to believe they are bullied
   because others are jealous of their potential, Ruben said. “I don’t
   think that anyone who picked on me would have traded places with me,”
--

   And now he’s performing his one-hour show in front of a room full of
   high school freshmen whose reaction to his nerdy confessions is
   unpredictable.

