   #Being A Geek: What It Really Means About You And 5 Ways To Leverage It
   - RSS

   Subscribe
   (BUTTON) Sign In
   (BUTTON)
   BETA
   This is a BETA experience. You may opt-out by clicking here

More From Forbes

   Dec 13, 2022,01:15pm EST
   15 Ways To Revamp Your Career Page And Attract Top Talent
   Dec 13, 2022,12:34pm EST
   From Enron To Trump: The Myth Of The Rogue CFO
   Dec 13, 2022,11:27am EST
   Older And Younger Generations Are Colliding As Family Enterprises Face
   New Realities
   Dec 13, 2022,09:58am EST
   Forbes Promotes Sherry Phillips To Chief Revenue Officer And Vadim
   Supitskiy To Chief Digital And Information Officer
   Dec 13, 2022,08:30am EST
   Four Indications Your Team Needs To Level Up Their Communication Skills
   Dec 13, 2022,08:30am EST
   Igniting Imagination In The Workplace
   Dec 13, 2022,08:15am EST
   11 Ways Biz Dev Teams Can Build Up Their Base From Big Data
   Dec 13, 2022,08:15am EST
   14 Career Tips For Early-Stage Communications Professionals
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   Edit Story
   Careers

Being A Geek: What It Really Means About You And 5 Ways To Leverage It

   David Sturt and Todd Nordstrom
   Former Contributor
   Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.
   Apr 20, 2017,05:35pm EDT|
     * Share to Facebook
     * Share to Twitter
     * Share to Linkedin

   Being a geek used to create images of social misfits, and less than
   attractive personalities. But,... [+] not anymore. Credit:Shutterstock

   Geeks—the two of us might fit the profile. Yes we have tendencies to
   contemplate things that probably shouldn’t be contemplated. We
   question. We prod. We poke…at everything. And, we’ve been known to
   engage in long, seemingly meaningless conversations about random things
   like: “Is the love of curry a genetic disposition or a socially
   experiential acquisition?” Or, what is the real meaning of the word
   “of?” That’s a valid question, right? Or, is it just geeky?

   Being geeky, according to research by Imgur, is actually cool in
   today’s world—especially among Millennials. In fact, 60% of the 83
   million Millennials consider themselves geeks compared to just 38% of
   GenXers and Boomers. And, the study also shows that geeks are the
   trendsetters and influencers (84% of geeks say people look to them for
   advice while only 60% of non-geeks say they get asked for advice).

   This is, of course, welcome news for all of us who happen to randomly
   know Peter Parker’s height and weight (yes, we’re referring to the
   fictional character who turns into Spiderman). But, more than that,
   it’s also welcome news for all of us who geek-out about our own
   work—passionately probing to innovate, improve, dissect, and lead
   others to the discovery of their best selves.

   We’re geeks about why people and companies do the things they do. We
   want to understand the reasons Richard Branson is so admired as a
   leader, the reason Stance socks seemingly transformed men’s attire by
   shining a spotlight on our ankles, and the reason Raj (a guy we met at
   the airport traveling from Malasia to Los Angeles for business) is
   feverishly working on a new suitcase prototype that he claims will
   change everything we know about travel.

   The truth is, all of us are geeks on some level, about something.
   However, we’ve found that most of us don’t focus our inner geek on
   utilizing some of the most obvious, and powerful, paths to turn ideas
   into game-changing success. Here are five critical areas you should
   explore if you want to turn your geeky ideas into results.

   1. The Mentor: Yes, we can talk about leaders like Gates, Zuckerberg,
   and Branson. We can hold them all in a mentor-ish spotlight to learn
   all about their accomplishments. But, when it comes to finding a true
   mentor, it’s important to personally know the individual well enough
   that they can teach you both the things they did right, and the things
   they did wrong. “I’ve failed more than anyone I know,” digital
   innovator Jay Samit told us in a recent interview. “There’s great value
   in failure.” Find a mentor that can show you both what you should do,
   and what you should stop doing.

   2. The Hurdle: Finding new ways to solve old problems is not a new
   idea. But, taking ownership of the problem and the outcome might be.
   Bestselling author and media dynamo, Nely Galan recently told us,
   “Ownership is a mindset, and it’s often the biggest hurdle we all need
   to overcome. Stop thinking that Prince Charming (a person, a group, or
   a company) is going to swoop in and save the day. The problem is your
   opportunity. You are the person to solve it.” When obstacles exist,
   it’s important to focus your inner geek on the opportunity that’s being
   presented to you

   3. The Silo: Day in and day out you go to the office and probably sit
   next to the same people. When you have ideas, you probably share them
   with the same people each day. But research shows that 72% of award
   winning work stems from people talking to, and sharing ideas with,
   their outer circle—the people you don’t talk to every day. Our friend,
   author Tim Sanders recently told us, “Sales has always been the job of
   salespeople. But, when organizations eliminate the silos, and include
   everyone in the company who has a stake in the sale, they can achieve a
   70% close ratio.” Think about the other people who have a stake in your
   idea. Get out of your silo and talk to your outer circle.

   4. The Beach: Rest and relaxation is important to our well-being. But,
   there’s more to vacation than just dipping your toes in the water. CEO
   and Founder of Sea Side Reservations, Steve Schwab, recently told us,
   “Routines can make us run on autopilot. Going somewhere new, and seeing
   different things, and the different ways people do things leads to
   unbelievable breakthroughs, sometimes from the most unexpected places.”
   He’s right. Whether you travel across the country or across town,
   getting out of your routine and daily environment can inspire fresh
   thinking and analysis for your inner geek to process.

   5. The Child: Let’s face it, a lot of the geek stereotype focuses on
   science fiction and video games from our childhood. And, although
   there’s probably not a lot we can learn from a Wookie, organizational
   thought leaders like Brenda Hardesty and Sue Baechler are combining the
   science of game-based learning with strategy implementation to deliver
   impressive business outcomes for players of their game aptly called
   the All In board game.  “Game research shows that players retain 75% of
   what they learn, and 45% after six weeks,” said the creators. “That’s a
   stark difference from traditional training methods—where participants
   only retain 4%.” When chasing results, allow you inner child to
   escape—where your projects are filled with wonder, competitiveness, and
   fun.

   Being a geek used to draw up images of social misfits, awkward
   conversations, and less than attractive personalities. But, that’s not
   the case anymore, as geeks have become the global trendsetters and
   influencers. It’s a welcome message, long-awaited, for many of us. …and
   it’s a club we’re not ashamed to belong to—because if you focus your
   inner-geek on the areas above, success isn’t too far behind.
   Follow me on Twitter. Check out my website.
   David Sturt and Todd Nordstrom
   David Sturt and Todd Nordstrom

     * Editorial Standards
     * Print
     * Reprints & Permissions

   ____________________ (BUTTON)
