   #alternate The Black Nerds Redefining the Culture

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Sections
   (BUTTON) SEARCH
   Skip to contentSkip to site index

   Today’s Paper

   T Magazine|The Black Nerds Redefining the Culture
   https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/24/t-magazine/black-nerds-culture.html
     * (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

   Supported by
   Continue reading the main story

   social studies

The Black Nerds Redefining the Culture

   By pushing back against centuries-old stereotypes, a historically
   overlooked community is claiming space it was long denied.
     * Send any friend a story
       As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month.
       Anyone can read what you share.
       (BUTTON)
       (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)

   “Illustrating superheroes requires imagination, but drawing a Black
   nerd merely requires a mirror,” says the Atlanta-based comic book
   artist Brian Stelfreeze, who created these panels for T. “I remember
   organizing Dungeons &amp; Dragons campaigns as if they were late-night
   Prohibition speakeasies, but now it’s a badge you can wear proudly.”
   “Illustrating superheroes requires imagination, but drawing a Black
   nerd merely requires a mirror,” says the Atlanta-based comic book
   artist Brian Stelfreeze, who created these panels for T. “I remember
   organizing Dungeons & Dragons campaigns as if they were late-night
   Prohibition speakeasies, but now it’s a badge you can wear
   proudly.”Credit...Brian Stelfreeze

   By Adam Bradley
   Published March 24, 2021Updated June 28, 2021

   OMAR HOLMON WAS in high school when his mother sat him down for the
   talk. “I thought we were having the talk about being Black in America,”
   he recalls. “Oh, no. You already know all that,” she told him. “I’m
   talking about you being such a big nerd!” In Holmon’s room, in the
   dresser drawers where his clothes should have been, he kept
   sequentially ordered issues of Daredevil and Green Lantern comics. He
   watched “Daria” and “Samurai Jack.” He played Mario Kart. This was in
   Hackensack, N.J., in the early 2000s. Omar’s mother feared her son
   might never find a date.

   Two decades later, Holmon, now 36 and based in Brooklyn, is happily
   married and the co-founder, along with William Evans, 41, of the
   website Black Nerd Problems. Their book of the same title will be
   published this summer. Both projects excavate the territory of nerd
   culture — comics, anime, e-sports, tabletop gaming, science fiction,
   fantasy and more — from a Black perspective that the broader nerd
   community has historically overlooked or, worse still, outright
   attacked.

   The pair are part of a new generation of Black nerds (or “Blerds,” as
   it is sometimes styled, a portmanteau of “Black” and “nerds”): critics
   and creators, scholars and social influencers, artists and activists
   who are shifting the culture in the years following the election of
   Barack Obama, America’s first Black and Blerd president, by centering
   unexpected stories of Black characters. Jordan Peele, a self-proclaimed
   Blerd, has lately exercised his influence, built by advancing the
   horror genre in film through “Get Out” (2017) and “Us” (2019), and with
   his reimagining of the classic sci-fi television series “The Twilight
   Zone” (2019-20). The director Ava DuVernay is also delving into science
   fiction and fantasy, adapting both Octavia E. Butler’s novel “Dawn”
   (1997) and DC Comics’ “New Gods” (1971) for the screen. Marvel Comics
   has in recent years embraced Black characters — witness the forthcoming
   Disney+ series “The Falcon and the Winter Soldier,” starring Anthony
   Mackie as Falcon — as well as Black creators like the director Ryan
   Coogler, who is working on a new Wakanda series and a sequel to “Black
   Panther” (2018), which is scheduled to be released next year. Newly
   visible in part due to the remarkable commercial success of that
   franchise, as well as to critically acclaimed television series like
   HBO’s “Watchmen” (2019) and “Lovecraft Country” (2020), the Blerd
   moment seems to have only just begun.

   But being Black and nerdy hasn’t always been so glamorous. Black comic
   book fans report suspicious white store owners trailing them in shops.
   At Comic-Cons, Black cosplayers are sometimes chastised by officious
   gatekeepers, told that their chosen characters aren’t supposed to be
   Black. More ominously, Black gamers hear the N-word hurled casually
   during online sessions and sometimes find themselves targeted for
   attack when revealed or presumed to be Black. In addition to these
   outside pressures, many Black fans of fantasy, science fiction and
   other genres erroneously coded as white spaces face ridicule from Black
   friends and family members who see what they do as “acting white.”

   Image
   Touchstones of Black nerd culture include DC’s “New Gods” series
   (1984).Credit...Courtesy of DC
   Image
   A page from “New Gods #2” (1971), written and drawn by Jack
   Kirby.Credit...Courtesy of DC

   The tension is this: Black nerds unsettle the myth of a monolithic
   Blackness. In an American imagination that has historically stereotyped
   Black people as alternately ignorant and emotional or sexualized and
   cool, the nerd — smart and cerebral, unsexy and decidedly uncool —
   creates cognitive dissonance. Not only do Black nerds confound racist
   stereotypes, they also pierce the protective orthodoxy of Blackness
   passed down in the United States across generations. Under slavery and
   Jim Crow, Black people maintaining — or at least projecting — unity
   proved a necessary protective practice. Strength came in numbers, as
   did political influence and economic clout. What would happen if we all
   announced publicly that we were going to start doing our own human
   thing without regard to the group? Few considered it worth the risk to
   find out.

   But who in 2021 benefits from thinking of Black people as just one
   thing? Certainly not Black individuals, who, like all individuals, are
   complex amalgams of shifting affinities, of inherited and chosen
   identities. And certainly not Black nerds, whose very existence is
   often rendered invisible because they present an inconvenient
   complication to a straightforward story of Blackness in America.

   SAY THE WORD “NERD” and it conjures Coke-bottle glasses and pocket
   protectors, the kind worn by the studious and socially awkward white
   guys (and they are nearly always white and nearly always guys) bullied
   in 1980s cult classic films: think Robert Carradine’s Lewis Skolnick
   from “Revenge of the Nerds” (1984) and Crispin Glover’s George McFly
   from “Back to the Future” (1985). This is Nerd 1.0. The Nerd 1.0
   archetype has its variants, perhaps the most prominent being the East
   Asian nerd (the flip side to the stereotypical martial-arts action
   hero), portrayed with model-minority bookishness, either sexless or
   sex-crazed, like Gedde Watanabe’s Long Duk Dong from “Sixteen Candles”
   (1984). Though Nerd 1.0 might seem easy to dismiss as an all in good
   fun comic figure, its influence has lingered in the typecasting faced
   by both East Asian and South Asian actors to this day. But over the
   decades, the term “nerd” has undergone a dramatic evolution — some
   would call it a corruption. Once the defiant moniker of the brainy
   social outcast, nerd is now claimed by anyone with a deep affinity for
   some area of knowledge. Call it Nerd 2.0. Sneakerheads are nerds now,
   obsessing over tooling and the vicissitudes of the secondary sales
   market. So are cannabis connoisseurs, with encyclopedic knowledge of
   different strains and the legal highs they produce. “Nerd is not an
   othering anymore; it’s a spectrum,” Holmon says.

   The most famous fictional Black nerd, Steve Urkel, portrayed for nine
   seasons starting in 1989 by the actor Jaleel White on the sitcom
   “Family Matters,” is decidedly Nerd 1.0. He wears high-water pants with
   suspenders; his enormous eyeglasses are secured to his head by a strap.
   Clumsy and irrepressible, his running gag relies on him disrupting the
   lives of his neighbors, the Winslow family, then uttering his
   high-pitched, nasal catchphrase, “Did I do that?” Urkel is equal parts
   exhausting and endearing, which explains how he went from a supporting
   character to the star of the show. Reprise his role in 2021, however,
   and you’d likely fill it with a Nerd 2.0: perhaps a young Questlove,
   the polymathic drummer of the Roots, or a teenage Daveed Diggs, the
   Grammy and Tony Award-winning actor and recording artist who now has a
   recurring role as an Urkelian interloper on the family sitcom
   “Black-ish.”

   Image
   “This work is a meditation on the stylistic attributes that have become
   emblematic in nerd fashion,” says the Brooklyn-based artist Troy
   Michie, who made this original collage for T. “Using the character of
   Steve Urkel as a reference, the work starts to unfold, complicating the
   confines of a singular identity.”Credit...Troy Michie, “Did I Do That”
   (2020)

   Better yet, think of Issa Rae, the 36-year-old actress, writer and
   producer behind the hit HBO series “Insecure,” whose fifth and final
   season will air later this year. The protagonist, Issa — Rae shares a
   name with her character — seems like a Blerd avatar: a Stanford
   graduate working at a nonprofit in her hometown of Los Angeles who is
   at once awkward, quirky and cool. However, when asked by a journalist
   from The Atlantic in 2018 if she saw her character as the natural Blerd
   evolution from Urkel, Rae pushed back. “I never identified my character
   as nerdy, because the classic cultural nerd — the gamer, the ‘Star
   Wars’ or sci-fi or ‘Lord of the Rings’ geek — just never interested
   me,” she said. Instead, she sought to explore the “in-between” of Black
   characters — the complexity and peculiarity often denied by the
   polarized perspective on Black people as cool or corny. Rae’s
   reluctance to accept the Blerd designation for herself or her character
   doesn’t stop Blerds from embracing her and her show: “I don’t know if
   she realizes that she made such an impact on Black girls who call
   themselves nerds,” says Jamie Broadnax, 40, the Virginia Beach-based
   founder of the online community Black Girl Nerds.

   Nerds are the cool kids now, and it’s not because they’ve changed all
   that much; after all, a big part of being a nerd is a stubborn
   insistence on the eccentricities of one’s passions and personality.
   Rather, cool itself has changed. In an increasingly fragmented media
   landscape, monastic dedication to a narrow interest is no longer
   stigmatized. Communities build up around affinities, connecting people
   through social media platforms that foster the rapid exchange of ideas
   — or, more succinctly put, are conducive to nerding out. Coolness also
   follows power, and great power now rests in sectors of society,
   particularly in technology, where nerds have traditionally thrived.

   “Nerds hold the keys to the castle,” says Terril “Rell” Fields, the
   33-year-old founder of the Raleigh, N.C.-based blerd.com. Growing up,
   Fields was “almost stereotypically nerdy.” Before he got contact lenses
   for sports, he wore huge glasses with one lens thicker than the other
   to correct the vision in his weaker eye. “And I was at the lunch table
   with the kids playing Magic: The Gathering, which did not help at all,”
   he says with a laugh. When he launched blerd.com in 2019, after
   assembling a team of fellow Blerds, it marked a culmination of
   thousands of hours spent gaming, flipping through comic books and
   watching anime. “Blerds still love the same types of content [as other
   nerds],” he says. “A Blerd just sees nerd culture through their Black
   cultural lens.” They may notice things that other nerds don’t: a Black
   or brown supporting character in a comic book that might otherwise be
   forgotten; a political allegory of race and democracy played out in a
   sci-fi television series.

   When it comes to finding distinct points of entry into nerd culture,
   Blerds are not alone. Disability, long a theme in these realms —
   whether through Professor Charles Xavier and his X-Men or
   neurodiversity in science fiction — is also a defining facet of the new
   nerd culture, with fans pushing for accessibility in gaming and greater
   inclusion at Comic-Cons. Queer and trans nerds are also increasingly
   visible and, along racial lines, Indiginerds claim space, as do Latina
   and Asian subsets of the universe. Bao Phi, who grew up a
   self-described “Vietnamese ghetto refugee nerd” in Minnesota’s Twin
   Cities, wrote a column in 2010 for the Star Tribune that inspired the
   website thenerdsofcolor.org, which now brings together a cross-racial
   coalition.

   But for many of the Black nerds coming of age in the past two decades,
   the term “Blerd” was a lifeline. It cast a protective spell, offering a
   covert way for Black fans to connect and communicate in spaces that
   were often hostile to their presence. “Most of us calling ourselves
   Blerds were simply trying to find each other,” explains Karama Horne,
   the Brooklyn-based founder of a website called theblerdgurl. Before the
   advent of Twitter in 2006 and Instagram in 2010, Horne frequented
   message boards and other virtual spaces where she often witnessed women
   and people of color being bullied. Once the word “Blerd” gained
   currency, it was possible to support one another against racist and
   sexist trolls. Ultimately, the word came to define a movement, one that
   was hiding all along in plain sight.

   Image
   “Star Trek”’s Lieutenant Nyota Uhura (played by Nichelle Nichols) on a
   2002 cover of TV Guide.Credit...TV Guide/Courtesy of Everett Collection
   Image
   Jaleel White, who played Steve Urkel on “Family Matters,” on the cover
   of a 1991 TV Guide.Credit...TV Guide/Courtesy of Everett Collection

   A BRIEF HISTORY of Black nerds dates back to before the Revolutionary
   War, to Phillis Wheatley, the young Black woman born a slave who was
   the first person of African descent to publish a collection of English
   poetry — only to have to prove her authorship, as well as her knowledge
   of the works of Homer, Ovid and Virgil, to a panel of “the most
   respectable characters in Boston,” as the 18 white men described
   themselves in a note “To the Public” that introduces her “Poems on
   Various Subjects, Religious and Moral” (1773). The Black nerd also
   lives in the pages of Charles W. Chesnutt, whose short-story collection
   “The Conjure Woman” (1899) reads like a late 19th-century iteration of
   Peele’s “Get Out,” where the resources of the Black imagination
   overcome the sunken place of white mythmaking and domination. And it
   lives in Ralph Ellison’s “Invisible Man” (1952), whose nameless Black
   male protagonist is a self-described “thinker-tinker” writing the story
   of his life from his underground lair fitted with precisely 1,369 light
   bulbs; even the novel’s title evokes H.G. Wells’s science fiction
   classic “The Invisible Man” (1897), repurposing invisibility as a
   metaphor for the erasure of Black identity under the racist white gaze.

   Back in the 1980s in Mobile, Ala., two cousins — a boy and a girl —
   spent hours together conjuring imagined worlds. He loved comic books;
   the Incredible Hulk series was his favorite because, though the boy
   could never be white like Bruce Banner, he could perhaps turn green
   like the Hulk. She loved science fiction; Tanith Lee and C.S. Friedman
   enchanted her, as did Octavia E. Butler, who was Black like her. Fast
   forward half their lifetimes and the boy, now a 48-year-old man, the
   stand-up comic and political commentator W. Kamau Bell, has won three
   consecutive Emmys for CNN’s “The United Shades of America.” The girl,
   now a 48-year-old woman, the novelist N.K. Jemisin, has won three
   consecutive Hugo Awards for the novels in her Broken Earth trilogy. “I
   get goose bumps thinking about it,” Bell says. “The two of us in my
   grandmother’s house as kids laying on the floor, her writing and me
   drawing and ultimately clinging together because we didn’t feel like we
   fit in.” That sense is common to Black nerds, particularly among those
   who grew up before there was a name to call themselves. “I was in my
   30s before I heard the word ‘Blerd.’ And I thought, ‘That would have
   been helpful when I was 12,’” Bell says. According to him, it’s about
   “planting a flag.” Blerd stakes a claim for the free and full exercise
   of Black individuality within the space of a collective identity.

   It’s no coincidence that Black creative voices have asserted themselves
   so powerfully at a time when Black suffering and death have dominated
   the news: Eric Garner, Elijah McClain, Derrick Scott and George Floyd
   all cried out “I can’t breathe” before they were killed at the hands of
   law enforcement. The phrase became a rallying cry for Black Lives
   Matter activists. Bell hears within those desperate words a call to
   action for artists, as well. His cousin’s novels, set on distant
   planets, peopled by beings whose names sound foreign on the tongue, are
   more than escapist fantasies. “This sort of individualist art creates
   more space for Black people to breathe,” Bell says. “It creates more
   space for us to relax and be ourselves. [Then] we can actually stand up
   and fight when we need to fight.”

   Art and activism have often accompanied each other in Black American
   life. “Every revolution, every evolution, has some type of aesthetic
   sister or brother movement,” says the artist John Jennings, 50, a
   professor of media and cultural studies at the University of
   California, Riverside, who has illustrated Damian Duffy’s graphic novel
   adaptations of Butler’s “Parable of the Sower” (2020) and “Kindred”
   (2017), and in 2015 drew the cover for a lauded collection, “Octavia’s
   Brood: Science Fiction Stories From Social Justice Movements,” in which
   artist-activists explore how fantasy is also a resource for political
   change. In the foreword, the book’s co-editors, Walidah Imarisha and
   Adrienne Maree Brown, issue a call to action: ﻿“We believe it is our
   right and responsibility to write ourselves into the future.”

   Image
   The title page of “Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral”
   (1773) by Phillis Wheatley, a foundational Black nerd.Credit...Rare
   Book and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress, Washington,
   D.C.

   “The idea of a Black future is still a radical notion,” Jennings says.
   “Think about it: Before ‘Star Trek,’ the only time you would see Black
   folk or people of color in the future — well, you wouldn’t. ... Were we
   murdered? Were we dropped in the ocean? We don’t even know.”
   Afrofuturism uses literature and the graphic arts, music and dance,
   film and television to imagine Black people into a future long denied
   them. These recuperative acts are about more than entertainment, though
   they must also be entertaining; they argue that even imagined futures
   must take stock of the past. In these Afrofuturist stories, the most
   inconceivable plot points aren’t invented — time-traveling portals and
   Rorschach masks — but real. Both “Watchmen” and “Lovecraft Country”
   revisit the searing trauma of the 1921 Tulsa Massacre, in which white
   mobs killed hundreds of Black fellow citizens and burned the thriving
   Greenwood district in Oklahoma to the ground. In doing so, both series
   circumvent linear time, opening up new mechanisms for confronting a
   tortured inheritance. “A lot of times, we are dragging our pain with us
   into the future,” Jennings says. By depicting this historical atrocity
   and recasting it within a salvific Black narrative, with Black heroes
   ready to fight, these stories offer a way, much like the blues, to
   transcend pain not by evading it but by making it into art.

   The New Negro Movement of the 1920s, spearheaded in part by W.E.B. Du
   Bois, the political philosopher and tactician (and author of a 1920
   sci-fi story, “The Comet”), had the Harlem Renaissance. The Black Power
   Movement of the late 1960s and the 1970s had the Black Arts Movement.
   It should come as no surprise that the emergent political insurgency is
   taking shape at a time when artists are increasingly drawn to
   speculative fiction and fantasy, horror and weird fiction as a
   necessary respite from the unrelenting pressure of combating white
   supremacy, and as a creative resource for addressing present-day
   challenges. In an era in which the notion of fact itself is unmoored,
   and space lasers are not the stuff of comic books but of hateful
   conspiracy theories, sci-fi and fantasy might just provide the
   necessary distance from our present conflicts to reimagine a shared set
   of norms and values — not yet here, but in a galaxy far, far away.
   “There’s nothing wrong with escapism, and there’s nothing wrong with
   using science fiction and fantasy as self-care,” says Horne of
   theblerdgurl. “Having moments of happiness and joy in between pain.
   That’s us. That’s part of our culture.”

   MICA BURTON IS a nerd renaissance woman: an e-sports host, cosplay
   model, anime aficionado and Dungeons & Dragons player. She’s also
   fluent in Elvish, a constructed language J.R.R. Tolkien introduced in
   his “Middle-earth” books, which she put on display earlier this year
   during her appearance on Narrative Telephone, a web series developed
   during the pandemic by a collective of gamers called Critical Role.
   Officially launched in 2015 by Matthew Mercer, Critical Role
   livestreams D&D games via the video platform Twitch; YouTube episodes
   have garnered over 288 million views.

   Burton, 26 and based in Los Angeles, is not a Blerd, she tells me, but
   a nerd who happens to be Black. “I’m not trying to assimilate,
   necessarily, but I’m trying to exist in space without purposefully
   stating that I’m different,” she explains. This resistance to the Blerd
   moniker is suggestive of a generational divide, even among those at
   opposite ends of the millennial band. “I meet a lot of people who are
   in their 20s and younger who don’t like the term,” Horne says. “They
   say, ‘I don’t understand why we have to call ourselves something
   different. Why can’t you just be a nerd?’ I laugh because I’m like,
   ‘I’m so happy that you feel that there are so many of us that we don’t
   have to say it anymore.’” Blerd or nerd, the challenge is the same: to
   be at home in the worlds of one’s choosing. “My entire purpose of my
   career is to be the representation I didn’t have as a kid,” Burton
   says.

   Image
   A 2020 graphic novel adaptation, by Damian Duffy and illustrated by
   John Jennings, of Octavia E. Butler’s “Parable of the Sower”
   (1993).Credit...© Abrams ComicArts, 2020
   Image
   The cover of a new edition of Butler’s “Dawn” (1987).Credit...Courtesy
   of Grand Central Publishing

   When Burton was a kid, her nerd tendencies were fostered by a
   supportive family. By elementary school, she and her father were
   playing video games together, sharing a passion for fantasy and
   fighting games. “We played Halo together and I kicked his ass,” she
   says. “It’s how fathers and daughters work.” Mica Burton’s father is
   LeVar Burton, who as Kunta Kinte on “Roots” (1977), Lieutenant
   Commander Geordi La Forge on “Star Trek: The Next Generation” in the
   late ’80s and early ’90s and the host of PBS’s long-running children’s
   series “Reading Rainbow” is something like the patron saint of Black
   nerds. Early on, though, Mica set out on her own path. “She’s always
   been a ‘Star Wars’ fan over ‘Star Trek,’” says LeVar, 64 and also based
   in Los Angeles. That stubborn streak has served her well as she’s
   pushed to clear a path for nerds like herself — a self-identified cis
   female Black bisexual — in spaces that sometimes don’t know what to do
   with her or, worse still, are actively hostile to her presence. “I
   can’t tell you how many times I’ve had to bring it up to people: ‘Hey,
   if I’m gonna be on your livestream, do you have moderation that blocks
   the N-word? Because that’s gonna happen,’” she says.

   Her father knows the challenge of fitting his Blackness in to places
   where it isn’t always welcome. Even on “Reading Rainbow,” which he
   began hosting in 1983 when he was the age his daughter is now, he had
   to fight to retain the markers of his identity: his earring, his
   changing hairstyles, the things that defined his young Black manhood.
   “It’s a part of who I am,” he told the producers at the time. “If you
   want me to do this show, then you’ve gotta take all of me.” They
   conceded.

   These dogged acts of representation, of taking his effortless Black
   cool to places where it might be least expected, are part of what makes
   LeVar an enduring presence in American culture. Today, his podcast,
   “LeVar Burton Reads,” lends his voice to both pioneering and emerging
   authors of Black sci-fi and fantasy, from Samuel R. Delany and Nalo
   Hopkinson to Nnedi Okorafor and Suyi Davies Okungbowa. “It was really
   my love of science fiction that put me squarely in the category [of
   Black nerd], even at a young age,” LeVar says. “For a young Black kid
   growing up in Sacramento in the late ’60s, it was preferable to imagine
   other worlds and other ways of existing that did not involve racial
   prejudice.” Like any other sci-fi fan, he was drawn to exciting stories
   of far-flung galaxies; he was also driven by the urgent promise of a
   future where he might someday be free within himself.

   Watching Gene Roddenberry’s “Star Trek” in the 1960s, LeVar discovered
   a world more civil and sane than the one he witnessed one station down
   the dial, where news reports showed footage of Black people assaulted
   with fire hoses and attacked by police dogs. In Nichelle Nichols’s
   portrayal of Lieutenant Nyota Uhura, he and other Black viewers could
   see themselves as part of a future that seemed far from promised in the
   present. Uhura represented the first phase of advancement in Black nerd
   culture: representation. That representation is particularly profound
   for Black women. “Uhura is my spirit character: a Black woman at the
   back of a room full of white guys who has to listen and translate
   everything,” Horne says. “Nobody thinks about what Uhura does. She
   spoke every language in the universe. That’s Black women!”

   Black women continue to act as translators today, helping to bring
   Blerd culture into the mainstream. You can see this in politics. Stacey
   Abrams is an avowed Trekkie, and the Massachusetts congresswoman Ayanna
   Pressley is described by her friend Aisha Francis, the scholar and
   activist, as the consummate Blerd. You can see it in music. Lizzo, who
   plays the flute, was a proud band nerd in high school and used that
   outsider energy to define her distinctive, chart-topping style. And
   Janelle Monáe once joined Chester French on a 2009 song called “Nerd
   Girl,” on which she sings, “I’m your nerd girl / Reading comics in the
   dark / My favorite station’s NPR.” Now she’s the inspiration for
   Jemisin’s heroine Sojourner “Jo” Mullein in the “Far Sector”
   (2019-present) comic book series, which reimagines the universe of DC’s
   Green Lantern.

   Image
   A 1975 edition of Samuel R. Delany’s “Dhalgren.”Credit...Advertising
   Archive/Courtesy of Everett Collection

   You can see Black women nerds’ influence most especially on television.
   Jessica Williams and Phoebe Robinson, the podcasting duo behind “2 Dope
   Queens,” dedicated an episode of their 2018 HBO live performances to
   the topic of Blerds. “What are you nerdy about?” Williams asks one of
   their guests, the actress Uzo Aduba, who responds with a rhapsodic
   reverie on Ms. Pac-Man and Mortal Kombat. With “Lovecraft Country,” the
   showrunner Misha Green created a Blerd extravaganza, drawing on a
   predominantly Black cast to imagine a fantasy world still in touch with
   our own. These Black women creators represent the next phase in the
   evolution of Black nerd culture, advancing past representation alone to
   creative ownership. “It’s got to be more than putting a face on the
   screen, it’s got to be authority,” says Broadnax of Black Girl Nerds.
   “Black people being in positions of power.”

   This inflection point, of Black people in power both in front of and
   behind the camera, arrived just three years ago. “When it comes to
   Blerd culture, you have before ‘Black Panther’ and after ‘Black
   Panther,’” Jennings, the illustrator, says. The power of the film was
   partly symbolic — the fact of seeing a Black superhero was inspiring
   for a generation of Black viewers who previously had to imaginatively
   project themselves onto white protagonists or subsist on secondary
   characters. Less visible but perhaps more consequential, the film was
   the vision and product of a largely Black team of creators, led by
   Coogler. “If there wasn’t a ‘Black Panther,’ we would not have had a
   ‘Watchmen’; if there wasn’t a ‘Watchmen,’ they would have never given a
   Black woman millions of dollars to create the HBO show that was
   ‘Lovecraft Country,’” Horne explains. These successful works of public
   art and entertainment are matters of personal consequence for nerds —
   and Black nerds in particular — who suddenly find their passions
   vindicated. As Horne puts it, “I wasn’t considered mainstream until
   2018.”

   The triumph of “Black Panther” helps explain the ascendancy of Black
   nerds today. The film created an opportunity for undercover Blerds to
   test out their nerdish tendencies in public. Mica Burton witnessed “the
   feeling of safety among Black people to say, ‘I read comic books. I
   watch anime. I like Marvel films,’” she says. If your friends were cool
   with you doing the Wakanda salute, then maybe you could slip in that
   you still collect Pokémon cards. After 2018, she adds, “we saw a huge
   uprising of a lot more accounts of Black people on Twitter saying, ‘I
   like these things!’ and then other people going, ‘I do, too!’ And
   that’s how communities are formed.”

   THE FUTURE OF Black nerds is the future of the retro: a return to the
   timeworn techniques of storytelling. In a graphic novel or a video
   game, a Netflix series or a role-playing campaign, you can take things
   for granted — like racial and ethnic diversity, like equality along the
   spectra of gender and sexual orientation — that the world beyond is
   somehow still deliberating. These nerdish things offer freedom for
   self-fashioning that has historically been denied to Black Americans by
   a racist imaginary that insisted on projecting Black people in ways
   that served white supremacist fantasy and power. Black nerd culture
   rejects the grotesque menagerie of racist stereotypes, as well as the
   compensatory images of Black cool, by insisting on the full and
   sometimes messy exercise of human agency. It gives license to be Black
   and awkward, Black and brainy, Black and free.

   For Black Americans, exercising the freedom to imagine has always been
   a radical act, even a dangerous one. “Black Panther” and “Insecure” and
   “Lovecraft Country” prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Black stories
   can have wide appeal among all audiences — and specifically among white
   audiences. This is not only a commercial matter but a creative one:
   Black audiences have long had to project themselves into white stories.
   Whiteness was the default, and Black stories were thought to be
   compelling only to Black people themselves, or to white audiences
   seeking a voyeuristic glimpse into an unknown territory. What’s
   happening now is something different: the ordinary, everyday capacity
   of assuming that the particulars of Black lives can — and must — be
   understood as universal, too.

   At the end of “Invisible Man,” Ellison’s nameless protagonist asks a
   bold question: “And it is this which frightens me: Who knows but that,
   on the lower frequencies, I speak for you?” In 1952, a young Black
   author giving voice to a young Black protagonist claiming that he might
   speak for you — whomever you may be — was indeed a wild fantasy. Nearly
   70 years later, Black nerds, Blerds and dreamers everywhere are doing
   the same: daring to speak for a culture that needs their voices now
   more than ever.

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

Site Information Navigation

     * © 2022 The New York Times Company

     * NYTCo
     * Contact Us
     * Accessibility
     * Work with us
     * Advertise
     * T Brand Studio
     * Your Ad Choices
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Service
     * Terms of Sale
     * Site Map
     * Canada
     * International
     * Help
     * Subscriptions

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-P528B3&gtm_auth=tfAzqo1
   rYDLgYhmTnSjPqw&gtm_preview=env-130&gtm_cookies_win=x
