   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-KSG89LT

   Skip to main content
   (BUTTON) Open Navigation Menu

   To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories.
   (BUTTON) Close Alert
   Vanity Fair

   To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories.
   (BUTTON) Close Alert
   Sign In

   Search

     * Politics
     * Business
     * Hollywood
     * Style
     * Culture
     * Royals
     * Celebrity
     * Video
     * Podcasts
     * Gift Guides
     * VF Shop
     * What Is Cinema?

     * Newsletter
     * Archive
     * VF Shop
     * VF London
     * Magazine

   Culture

What Happens When Society Decides That Nerds Are Dangerous?

   By Fred Nadis
   June 17, 2014
     *
     *
     *
     * To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories.

   Image may contain Human Person and Reading
     *
     *
     *
     * To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories.

   In Sam Peckinpah’s 1971 movie Straw Dogs, Dustin Hoffman plays an
   ineffectual intellectual, a mathematician, indeed, a nerd, who moves
   with his alluring wife to her hometown, in England. Local rowdies
   continually harass them, until Hoffman’s character executes a violent
   revenge.

   The words “nerd” and “violent” do not usually go hand in hand, but the
   harmlessness of nerds is hardly a settled formula. Along with severe
   emotional disturbance, likely psychosis, and a slowly festering
   decision to carry out the rampage that ended in the deaths of six
   students, as well as his own on May 23 in Isla Vista, California,
   Elliot Rodger, for most of his life, fit the mold of a “nerd.” In his
   manifesto, “My Twisted World,” he noted that video games were his only
   refuge growing up: “I immersed myself entirely into my online games
   like World of Warcraft. I felt safe there.”

   Among recent murderers and would-be murderers, Rodger wasn’t alone in
   his nerdish pastimes. The Newtown Connecticut school shooter, Adam
   Lanza, even more of a loner than Rodger, was addicted to video games,
   including one creepy offering called School Shooting. Two 12-year-old
   Wisconsin girls who, a week after the Isla Vista shootings, stabbed a
   friend 19 times to invoke the imaginary character Slender Man acquired
   their ideas from an online game, as well as the horror urban-legend
   forum creepypasta.com.

   After the Isla Vista killings, commentators quickly linked Rodger’s
   worldview to his lifelong embrace of nerd-culture offerings such as
   Pokémon, Halo, Star Wars, World of Warcraft, and Game of Thrones.
   Arthur Chu, a former Jeopardy quiz-show champion, judged the mass
   murderer’s autobiography as “a standard frustrated angry geeky guy
   manifesto, except for the part about mass murder.” Chu posited that the
   sexist trappings of the video-game world abetted both Rodger’s belief
   that he was entitled to a “hot chick” and his vengeful ruminations when
   he continually failed to connect. Indeed, according to Chu, video-game
   graphics and storylines encourage a more general “rape culture.” He
   concluded it was time for fellow geeks to “grow up” and throw aside the
   sense of entitlement nerd culture engenders.

   This is hardly the first time nerdiness has become associated with
   aberrant behavior. History, however, suggests that nerd panics
   generally say less about geek communities than they do about the people
   doing the panicking—and the uncertainty of the times.

   In 1948, during the early Cold War period, two boys, ages 11 and 12,
   stole and flew a plane in Oklahoma—and said they’d learned how from
   comic books. The same year, a group of avid comic-reading kids in
   Indiana strung up a friend and burnt him with lit matches. Psychiatrist
   Fredric Wertham described a visit to his New York City clinic from a
   distraught mother whose young daughter was continually being assaulted
   by neighborhood boys, none older than nine, who pushed her off her
   bicycle, tied her up in the basement, whipped her, hit her with guns,
   and tore off her panties as they reenacted comic-book scenes. Wertham
   sensed a genuine danger in the era’s action comic books, with their
   glorification of crime, sadomasochism, eroticism, and, in his view,
   proto-fascism. He linked comic books to youth crimes in a series of
   sensationalist magazine articles as well as at the 1948 symposium The
   Psychopathology of Comic Books.

   Panic ensued. In December 1948, religious schoolchildren in Binghamton,
   New York, gathered up 2,000 comic books and burned them, while their
   parents and teachers cheered. Cities passed laws banning or censoring
   comics. Wertham’s 1954 book, Seduction of the Innocent, led to Senate
   hearings that year. Perhaps the high point came when William Gaines,
   future publisher of Mad Magazine, defended a horror comic cover that
   showed a man holding in one hand an axe covered with blood, and in the
   other, a woman’s severed head. Gaines noted, “A cover in bad taste, for
   example, might be defined as holding the head a little higher so that
   the neck could be seen dripping blood from it.”
   Most Popular
     * The White Lotus Season 3: Everything We Know—So Far
       By Savannah Walsh
     * The Republican Party's Donald Trump Problem Has a New Face: Kari
       Lake
       By Eric Lutz
     * Marjorie Taylor Greene
       Marjorie Taylor Greene Swears She Was Only Joking When She Said She
       Would Have “Won” January 6
       By Bess Levin
     *

   Senator Estes Kefauver responded, “You have blood coming out of her
   mouth.” Gaines replied, “A little.” Soon after, the industry
   established the Comics Code Authority to monitor comics, with
   guidelines similar to the 1930 Hays Code for Hollywood films.
   Politicians had to find new explanations for juvenile delinquency and
   rock ’n’ roll proved useful.

   A similar social panic centered on the otaku (or nerd) subculture in
   the late 1980s in Japan. Otaku made and swapped amateur manga (comic
   books) some of which were parodies, others featured romances between
   stylized gay men or the adventures of eroticized young girls. In 1989,
   police arrested Tsutomu Miyazaki, a manga and animé enthusiast with a
   taste for softcore porn. When the public learned that Miyazaki had
   abducted, mutilated, and killed four young girls, the entire otaku
   subculture was tainted. One Japanese social anthropologist commented,
   “There are over 100,000 people with the same pastimes as Mr. M.—we have
   a whole standing army of murderers.” Manga shops were raided and owners
   and amateur manga artists arrested and otherwise harassed. Journalists
   fretted that the “Otaku Tribe” was rotting society.

   Such stigmatizing overlooks the fact that nerd culture may just as
   likely provide therapeutic havens as pathological outposts. U.S. nerd
   culture’s origin traces to the science-fiction fan culture that began
   in the mid-1920s. This subculture, which provided a refuge for brainy
   oddballs (mainly men, but some women), and soon included features such
   as fanzines, conventions, and fanciful futuristic costume play, created
   the template for virtually all later youth subcultures. While hardly
   the multicultural ideal later imagined for the crew onboard the
   Starship Enterprise, the early community of fans was welcoming. Ray
   Palmer, a longtime editor of Amazing Stories, and an early organizer of
   nerd culture, was hunchbacked and stood just over four feet tall, but
   was lampooned for his chatty writing style and braggadocio—not his
   disabilities. While not “out” in the 1940s, some of the young devotees
   of science fiction became leaders of the gay-rights movement decades
   later. The speculative, malleable future of science fiction provided
   hope. As with other pulp magazine genres, science fiction also
   encouraged sexist stereotypes, with covers showing buxom women in metal
   bikinis threatened by space octopus. Science-fiction fandom also had
   its dark side. Pulp writer L. Ron Hubbard, with the aid of Astounding
   Science Fiction editor John W. Campbell launched what many consider the
   pathological and others the therapeutic movement of Dianetics, later
   known as Scientology. In his later years, Palmer fell victim to
   theories of Zionist plots for world domination.

   While many benefit from fan communities, some of the farther “geeky”
   outreaches of the online world undoubtedly encourage pathological
   thought. After abandoning the online game World of Warcraft when too
   many hated “jock” types took it up, Rodger found a final haven in the
   Web site puahate.com (this name derived from adding “Hate” to the
   acronym PUA or “pickup artist”), where he could share postings with
   other “incels” (involuntary celibates) who vented their hatred of women
   and of PUA’s who had success with women. This bulletin board likely
   encouraged Rodger’s really frightening ideas about the “degeneracy” of
   women. Rodger concluded his manifesto with statements such as “women
   are like a plague that must be quarantined.” He also offered a “final
   solution” to his cleansing campaign—proposing that all women be rounded
   up in concentration camps and destroyed, except a few to be kept in
   breeding facilities and artificially inseminated.
   Most Popular
     * The White Lotus Season 3: Everything We Know—So Far
       By Savannah Walsh
     * The Republican Party's Donald Trump Problem Has a New Face: Kari
       Lake
       By Eric Lutz
     * Marjorie Taylor Greene
       Marjorie Taylor Greene Swears She Was Only Joking When She Said She
       Would Have “Won” January 6
       By Bess Levin
     *

   Is geek culture to blame for this psychotic vision? If geek culture
   includes puahate.com, then the answer is a qualified yes. Yet, while
   troubled people may be drawn to subcultures like those of early science
   fiction or the otaku culture in 1980s Japan, more participants likely
   benefit from a sense of belonging than those who become delusional and
   violent. These subcultures can provide outlets for bizarre fixations.

   Panics over popular culture mask other insecurities. In the late 1940s
   and early 1950s, when the Comics Code Authority was enacted, parents
   began to wonder if they knew who their children were or who was
   controlling their minds. These worries mirrored the surrounding
   anxieties over communism and who could be trusted. The otaku panic in
   Japan revealed a group of young adults at the height of the Japanese
   Miracle that were not only alienated but alien, not one of “us.” One
   aspect of the trauma inflicted by the recent mass shootings in Isla
   Vista is awareness of a similar social fragmentation. Mass shootings
   end the illusion of unity, the illusion of what individuals are safe
   are “us.”

   Globalism and the digital-communications revolution have allowed
   micro-communities to bloom and the pursuits of happiness to multiply,
   go viral. The idea of an inclusive American identity seems dubious—at
   the moment there are too many channels, and too many perceived enemies,
   making it hard for “we” to find an “us.” In traditional Chinese
   culture, straw dogs were fashioned to serve as burned sacrifices in
   worship. Nerds have become, temporarily, a species of straw dog relied
   on in the ceremony to protect our dream of unity.

   Fred Nadis is the author of The Man from Mars: Ray Palmer’s Amazing
   Pulp Journey*(2013), a Locus Award Finalist, and* Wonder Shows:
   Performing Science, Magic, and Religion in America (2005).

Fred Nadis

   See More By Fred Nadis »

Cocktail Hour & V.F. Weekly

   Sign up for our essential daily brief and never miss a story. It's on
   the house.
   Enter your e-mail address
   ____________________
   (BUTTON) Sign Up

   By signing up you agree to our User Agreement and Privacy Policy &
   Cookie Statement.
   Read More
   hollywood
   Albert Pyun, Auteur of the VHS Era, Has Died at Age 69
   The low-budget maverick director made movies about cyborgs, sorcerers,
   and aliens with unparalleled enthusiasm.

   By Jordan Hoffman
   hollywood
   Andor Broke New Ground and Shattered Star Wars Traditions. Did It Pay a
   Price?
   It’s hailed as the best of the galaxy’s shows, but isn’t massive like
   The Mandalorian or Obi-Wan Kenobi. The reason, like the morality of the
   series, is complicated.

   By Anthony Breznican
   television
   Willow Resurrected: The Hard-Fought Story of an Epic Comeback
   How one screenwriter’s determination and lifelong fandom brought the
   ’80s fantasy favorite back to life. Plus—a first look at Christian
   Slater’s shady new character.

   By Anthony Breznican
   television
   Lizzy Caplan Embraces Main-Character Energy in Fleishman Is in Trouble
   As existentially trapped stay-at-home mom Libby on the new Hulu limited
   series, Caplan enters a new chapter of her career.

   By Joy Press

   Vanity Fair
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   (BUTTON) More from Vanity Fair
     * Newsletter
     * Subscribe
     * Digital Edition
     * Inside the Issue

   (BUTTON) Contact
     * Contact VF
     * Customer Service
     * Advertising
     * Careers

     * Condé Nast Store
     * VF Media Kit
     * Accessibility Help
     * Condé Nast Spotlight
     * (BUTTON) Do Not Sell My Personal Info

   © 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes
   acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy and Cookie
   Statement and Your California Privacy Rights. Vanity Fair may earn a
   portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as
   part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this
   site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or
   otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
   Ad Choices

   CN Entertainment
   Select international site (BUTTON) United States
     * U.K.
     * Italy
     * Spain
     * France
