   #publisher

   [p?c1=2&amp;c2=9564200&amp;cv=3.6.0&amp;cj=1]

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PNLC48

   Skip to content
   (BUTTON) Menu Close Menu

Starting Up

   Starting a Business Ask an Expert Mentoring Webinars Entrepreneur
   Elevator Pitch Finance Side Hustle Accelerator

Growing a Business

   Growth Strategies Marketing Sales Customer Service Social Media
   Business Insurance

Franchise

   Franchise Center Take the Franchise Quiz Franchise 500 List Franchise
   How-Tos Franchise Service Providers Franchises for Sale BizOpp Listings

Inspiration

   Success Stories Leadership Entrepreneurs Branding Time Management

Follow Us

Browse By

   TV Video Podcast Latest News Popular Articles Books Webinars Spotlight

Editions

   United States Spanish Middle East India Asia Pacific Georgia Europe
   South Africa
   Subscribe to Entrepreneur
   Newsletters
   Magazine Subscriptions

   Signing out of account, Standby...

7 Reasons Why Nerds Rule The (Business) World

   Bill Gates once said, 'Be nice to nerds. Chances are you'll end up
   working for one.' Here are the mindsets that 'nerds' embrace that you
   can emulate in your life and business.
   By Matshona Dhliwayo
   April 26, 2019
   Opinions expressed by Entrepreneur contributors are their own.
   You're reading Entrepreneur South Africa, an international franchise of
   Entrepreneur Media.

   We all know the stereotype: intelligent, but overly awkward,
   unattractive, unpopular, and the butt of many jokes for their thick
   glasses, quirky braces and high-worn pants. Stereotypes aside though,
   and we realise that what society has come to label "nerds' are, in
   reality, a force to be reckoned with.
   Bigstock

   Related: The Leadership Lessons That Have Helped Bevan Ducasse Build a
   R100-Million Business

   The list of bonafide "nerd' tycoons is endless. Larry Page, Mark
   Zuckerberg, Elon Musk, and Jeff Bezos all reign supreme in their
   fields, with a combined estimated network of over USD250 billion. The
   numbers alone prove it, so much so that Bill Gates, the richest of them
   all, famously cautioned, "Be nice to nerds. Chances are you'll end up
   working for one."

7 Mindsets That Drive Success

   1. The love and respect people deny them growing up they get from what
   they do. Ridiculed, in some cases ostracized, and in extreme cases
   brutalized, they spend more time than most working on their dreams.
   Popularity hinders many from achieving their dreams. It's one reason
   why many jocks don't achieve more after university, while nerds end up
   magnates.
   2. They are obsessed with their hobbies. Spending all of their time and
   energy on them, they inevitably become the best at what they do.
   Research shows that it takes 10 000 hours to master a skill. Nerds
   typically dedicate far more to honing their skills early on in life.
   3. They love learning. They don't rely on their teachers alone for
   knowledge; they go beyond the curriculum requirements not just out of a
   desire to get As, but out of a genuine love of knowledge. In many
   cases, they even end up teaching their teachers.
   4. They have more to prove. Having endured years of being treated with
   contempt, they develop an inferiority complex and with it, an
   insatiable appetite to outdo everyone. They not only want to prove they
   deserve society's acceptance, but honor and adulation as well.
   5. Pain and isolation are catalysts for creativity. They channel
   negative energy the world throws at them into their work, thereby
   fueling innovation and in the best of cases, genius. Their later
   triumphs are in proportion to their former troubles.
   6. The world already assumes they are intelligent. Such prejudices mean
   geeks don't have to sell themselves as much as everyone. In fact, the
   nerdier they are the smarter they appear, and the smarter they appear
   the more opportunities they receive.
   7. They are not afraid of being themselves. It takes a lot to be
   yourself in a world that is constantly trying to mold you into someone
   else, especially if you are a nerd because you will be teased. But
   being unique, being original is a requirement to stand out. It's the
   only way you can produce products that wow everyone.

   Related: How To Be A Great Leader When Leadership Doesn't Come
   Naturally To You

     * Terms of Use
     * Privacy Policy
     * Cookies Policy
     * Site Map
     * Contact Support
     * Advertise

   Copyright © 2022 Entrepreneur Media, Inc. All rights reserved.

   Entrepreneur® and its related marks are registered trademarks of
   Entrepreneur Media Inc.

   Subscribe to Entrepreneur

   Successfully copied link
