   Login Join Search
   Fluther logo

Social Question

   Buttonstc's avatar

Computer geek or computer nerd? Which is most offensive or is neither?

   Asked by Buttonstc (27602 points ) August 22nd, 2013
   16 responses
   “Great Question” (0 points )

   I actually have a ton of mad respect for those proficient with
   computers and tech stuff (since my brain is not the least bit
   mathematical; totally opposite) so if I’m using either term I
   definitely don’t mean it negatively.

   However, I’m curious about how others view those terms, particularly
   those who are tremendously computer savvy.

   Is one word more offensive than the other? Or do you think neither are?
   Are there any better colloquial phrases to replace “computer proficient
   person”?

   Just curious.
   Follow this question
   Send to a friend!
   Topics: computers, geek, nerd, proficiency, tech slang
   Observing members: 0
   Composing members: 0

Answers

   Seek's avatar

   I think that we have successfully adopted both terms as compliments.
   ^_^
   Seek (34805 points )“Great Answer” (2 points )
   Michael_Huntington's avatar

   It’s very “in” to be a nerd/geek these days, so neither are offensive.
   Michael_Huntington (15956 points )“Great Answer” (3 points )
   ucme's avatar

   Computer freak, not in the least bit offensive & diverse too.
   ucme (50037 points )“Great Answer” (1 points )
   Buttonstc's avatar

   @ucme

   Hey, I like that :)
   Buttonstc (27602 points )“Great Answer” (0 points )
   jerv's avatar

   I find geek slightly less offensive as it has connotations of
   competence whereas nerd doesn’t. A nerd is a geek without skills.
   jerv (31076 points )“Great Answer” (3 points )
   ucme's avatar

   @Buttonstc Yeah, when used in the right place, freak is a massive
   compliment.
   One of those words that have evolved over time, a positive spin.
   ucme (50037 points )“Great Answer” (1 points )
   marinelife's avatar

   I think neither is really offensive, but that said I do not use either
   term..
   marinelife (62485 points )“Great Answer” (1 points )
   bunnyslippers's avatar

   I had a friend in high school who was the definition of a classic nerd,
   he would have fit into the revenge of the nerd movies quite well, but
   he didn’t like being called a nerd, I think he was fine with geek
   though. I’m also an uber nerd and have no problems with either term, of
   course my computer skills aren’t anything spectacular. But having
   worked IT Support once for six months I no longer say I don’t know
   anything because as stupid as it sounds, plunging things in was
   actually a problem I had to fix more than once…
   bunnyslippers (847 points )“Great Answer” (1 points )
   mrentropy's avatar

   I’ve never liked either term.

   Although it is mildly amusing that back when I was called those as
   insults, those same people are posting cat pictures on Facebook and
   can’t live without the Internet.
   mrentropy (17206 points )“Great Answer” (2 points )
   Buttonstc's avatar

   This is all giving me a fascinating perspective on all of this
   terminology.

   @mrentropy

   I can certainly understand why you feel as you do about terms which
   were hurled at you as insults.

   Just for curiosity, is there a colliquial appellation that you would
   prefer that could stand in for the rather torturous “person who is
   unusually proficient with computers” ?
   Buttonstc (27602 points )“Great Answer” (0 points )
   Buttonstc's avatar

   @jerv

   That’s an interesting perspective on the diff between the two.

   Do you remember the short-lived but fondly remembered TV program
   “Freaks And Geeks” ?
   Buttonstc (27602 points )“Great Answer” (0 points )
   anartist's avatar

   Neither, if you are into it. As @jerv points out, geek implies
   knowledge [witness Best Buy’s Geek Squad]. It’s a far cry from the
   original meaning of geek, when it was used disparagingly to computer
   buffs [another term]—geek originally meant “A sideshow freak,
   especially a pinhead retard who bit the heads off live chickens” and
   was used to insult non-jock computer buffs/nerds like Bill Gates was as
   a teenager.

   Meaning changed significantly with “he who laughs last laughs longest.”
   Probably because it once was the most offensive, it is now the least
   offensive. It is worn with pride.
   anartist (14803 points )“Great Answer” (0 points )
   mrentropy's avatar

   @Buttonstc Not really. It rarely comes up. I’m just some guy who does
   what he does.
   mrentropy (17206 points )“Great Answer” (0 points )
   Mr_Paradox's avatar

   Nerd is a label that conjures images of a pocket protectors, broken
   glasses held together with duct tape, and buck teeth. Geek has come to
   mean an otherwise “normal” person who likes nerdy things.
   Mr_Paradox (3049 points )“Great Answer” (1 points )
   anartist's avatar

   Wall Street Journal uses both equally positively
   anartist (14803 points )“Great Answer” (1 points )
   Buttonstc's avatar

   @anartist

   What a great article that is. Thanks for bringing it to our attention.

   I’m going to repost this link to a gaming site where several of us got
   into a side discussion about children attaching gender stereotypes to
   colors like purple. It then evolved to include careers in computers and
   engineering for women and how expectations are changing.

   (Also one of the women there managed to access about 400 pages of
   computer code related to the inner workings of the game and is
   currently sharung a lot of those insights with all of us. Obviously she
   works in computers.)

   Thanks for this article. Loved it.
   Buttonstc (27602 points )“Great Answer” (0 points )

Answer this question sending...

Login

   or

Join

   to answer.

   Older »
   Were these racist remarks naive, ignorant or just plain ...
   « Newer
   Why shouldn't smokers take a decongestant/expectorant?

Mobile | Desktop

Send Feedback

   `
