   #Geek Is Now A Praiseword, Not An Insult Apparently - RSS

   Subscribe
   (BUTTON) Sign In
   (BUTTON)
   BETA
   This is a BETA experience. You may opt-out by clicking here

More From Forbes

   Sep 8, 2022,08:00am EDT
   Deepfakes - The Danger Of Artificial Intelligence That We Will Learn To
   Manage Better
   Sep 8, 2022,08:00am EDT
   Overview Of How To Create Deepfakes - It’s Scarily Simple
   Jul 18, 2022,01:33pm EDT
   Ukrainian Startups Showing Resilience In A Time Of War
   Apr 3, 2022,07:24am EDT
   Worried That Your Phone Is Spying On You? Try A Different OS
   May 6, 2021,06:30am EDT
   Get Vaccinated? How Trust In Institutions Determines COVID Vaccination
   Rates In The EU
   Feb 9, 2021,08:23am EST
   Clubhouse’s Future Depends On Data - How To Build A TikTok Like
   Algorithm
   Feb 4, 2021,08:35am EST
   President Biden Is Man, Woman And 40 Years Old - Why We Need
   Algorithmic Transparency
   Jan 26, 2021,10:42am EST
   WhatsApp: We Should Discuss What Our Data Is Used For, Not Who Has It
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   Edit Story
   Opinion

Geek Is Now A Praiseword, Not An Insult Apparently

   Tim Worstall
   Former Contributor
   Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.
   Dec 16, 2013,09:25am EST|
   This article is more than 8 years old.
     * Share to Facebook
     * Share to Twitter
     * Share to Linkedin

   This is the time of year when the dictionary makers proudly announce
   the changes they've made in their offerings in their continual attempts
   to stay up with linguistic changes. The obvious reason being that this
   is the time of year when most dictionaries get bought. So, out come the
   lists of the years' "top word" ("selfie" according to one publisher)
   and others' point to the way that definitions have changed. The
   announcement from Collins is that "geek" is now a term of approbation,
   a praiseword, not the insult we all used it to be formerly.

     Ian Brookes, Consultant Editor to Collins Dictionary, said: “The
     evolving meanings of words are as interesting as brand new words to
     Collins.

     “Often we find that they achieve better longevity too. Just compare
     previous generations’ use of words like ‘cloud’, ‘tweet’ and
     ‘tablet’ to ours.

     “‘Geek’ is a great example of a word that has evolved from having a
     negative meaning to having a positive one.

     “Its origins are in the 19th century, but it has most recently
     changed from describing someone preoccupied with computing to
     someone who is passionate about any field of expertise.

   The formal definition is:

      Geek: a person who is knowledgeable and enthusiastic about a
     specific subject.

   Now the point about such dictionaries is not that they should be
   normative, trying to tell us how we should be using words at all.
   Rather, they are positive, telling us how the majority of our fellows
   are in fact using the word. So the change has come from us
   collectively, not from the dictionary compilers. We have decided to
   change the meaning of the word geek into that someone knowledgeable and
   enthusiastic, dropping the older slightly perjorative meaning.

   All of which rather makes sense really as it had been the geeks making
   all the money this past decade, them pushing the world's technology
   forwards as they do so.

   I should note one thing though: this is English English we are talking
   about here, not necessarily American English. You native speakers of
   that language will have to tell me whether the same thing has happened
   over there.
   Tim Worstall
   Tim Worstall

     * Editorial Standards
     * Print
     * Reprints & Permissions

   ____________________ (BUTTON)
