   (BUTTON) Sign Out (BUTTON) Sign In (BUTTON) Subscribe

   Holiday Sale - Only 99¢ for six months. Click here to subscribe! Sign
   up for our free newsletters.
   X

                 Being called a ‘tech geek’ is now a compliment

   (BPT)

   8 years ago

   Being called a ‘tech geek’ is now a compliment

   (BPT) – Are you the family member or friend who is always called when
   someone’s computer breaks or starts acting up? Do you have a person on
   speed dial whenever you need a website created or program updated? The
   old stereotype of a computer geek who’s always wearing a pocket
   protector and glasses with taped-together frames is quickly becoming a
   thing of the past.

   These days, men and women who are able to speak “tech” and fix those
   pesky computer programs are in high demand, both professionally and
   among friends and family. One reason is that more than 80 percent of
   American households have a computer, according to the U.S. Census
   Bureau. When those computers don’t work, who are you going to call?

   When someone calls a person a tech geek these days, it’s meant to be a
   compliment, according to a new survey conducted by GMI Research and
   commissioned by Crucial.com.

   Are you single and trying to promote yourself on dating sites? You
   might want to advertise that you’re a tech geek, according to the
   Tech-Know Meter Survey. One in three women say they prefer their
   significant other be tech savvy.

   “Americans recognize how prevalent tech has become in everyday life,”
   says Ed Walker, Crucial.com marketing manager. “These findings
   demonstrate that society has warmed to people who are the most capable
   at fixing and improving the devices we rely on, both in our personal
   and professional lives.”

   It’s not just that people want to be friends with tech geeks – they
   want to become one themselves, the survey found. A majority of men and
   women are interested in improving their personal tech savviness, even
   if it’s so they don’t have to constantly bug a friend for help. And
   while the percentage of people who claim to be tech savvy is heavily
   male, a significant number of women are showing interest, too, making
   the term tech geek more gender neutral.

   There’s a good chance you have a tech-geek friend, both in your
   personal life and at the office. In fact, you might have several at the
   office. Most industries these days rely on technology to survive, and
   survey respondents say job candidates with tech skills have a stronger
   resume than those who don’t.

   Having a strong list of tech geeks handy is important if you are not
   one yourself. So the next time someone is introduced to you as being a
   tech geek, be sure to get his or her number! And if you can call
   yourself a tech geek, wear the title like a badge of honor – and
   depending on how popular you want to be, protect your cellphone number!

   [ImageWriter.ashx?articleid=21427&amp;memberid=79771]

   .....We hope you appreciate our content. Subscribe Today to continue
   reading this story, and all of our stories.
   Holiday Sale
   Only 99¢ for six months
   SUBSCRIBE NOW
   Already a subscriber?
   (BUTTON) Sign In

Las Vegas Review-Journal

   Powered by WordPress.com VIP
   Back to top
