   #Why Do Nerds Become Successful CEOs? - RSS

   Subscribe
   (BUTTON) Sign In
   (BUTTON)
   BETA
   This is a BETA experience. You may opt-out by clicking here

More From Forbes

   Sep 8, 2022,08:00am EDT
   Deepfakes - The Danger Of Artificial Intelligence That We Will Learn To
   Manage Better
   Sep 8, 2022,08:00am EDT
   Overview Of How To Create Deepfakes - It’s Scarily Simple
   Jul 18, 2022,01:33pm EDT
   Ukrainian Startups Showing Resilience In A Time Of War
   Apr 3, 2022,07:24am EDT
   Worried That Your Phone Is Spying On You? Try A Different OS
   May 6, 2021,06:30am EDT
   Get Vaccinated? How Trust In Institutions Determines COVID Vaccination
   Rates In The EU
   Feb 9, 2021,08:23am EST
   Clubhouse’s Future Depends On Data - How To Build A TikTok Like
   Algorithm
   Feb 4, 2021,08:35am EST
   President Biden Is Man, Woman And 40 Years Old - Why We Need
   Algorithmic Transparency
   Jan 26, 2021,10:42am EST
   WhatsApp: We Should Discuss What Our Data Is Used For, Not Who Has It
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   Edit Story
   Small Business Strategy

Why Do Nerds Become Successful CEOs?

   Gene Marks
   Contributor
   Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.
   I write about public policy and tech that impacts my small business.
   Following
   New! Follow this author to stay notified about their latest stories.
   (BUTTON) Got it!
   Feb 10, 2014,09:16am EST|
   This article is more than 8 years old.
     * Share to Facebook
     * Share to Twitter
     * Share to Linkedin

   My son is halfway through his freshman year at college and is trying to
   decide on a major. He asked me over Christmas break for some advice. To
   me, it’s an easy choice. “Be a nerd,” I told him. “Be a nerd.”

   Satya Nadella was named CEO of Microsoft last week. Nadella has an
   undergraduate degree in engineering and master’s degrees in both
   computer sciences and business. Before joining Microsoft he worked as a
   member of the technology staff at Sun Microsystems. At Microsoft he was
   previously the President of their server and tools division, a senior
   VP of research and development at the online service division and an
   executive VP of their cloud and enterprise group.

   In other words, he’s a nerd. Oh, and did I mention he’s also a big fan
   of cricket? Definitely a nerd. And now he’s the CEO of Microsoft. Of
   all the people in the world, Microsoft chose a nerd to be its boss.

   Star Trek Magazine Poster Book, Voyage Three, Star Date 7611.01 (1976)
   (Photo credit: France1978)

   Nadella joins a long list of nerds running technology companies, big
   and small. People like Mark Zuckerberg, Tim Cook, and Larry Page. Dick
   Costolo, the CEO of Twitter graduated with degrees in computer and
   communication sciences before trying out his hand at comedy, a very
   nerd-like thing to do. Yahoo's Marissa Mayer graduated Stanford with a
   B.S. in symbolic systems (what the hell is that?) and an M.S. in
   computer science where her specialization was in artificial
   intelligence. And if that isn’t nerdy enough, Mayer reportedly dated
   Larry Page at one time.

   Amazon’s Jeff Bezos attended Princeton University and graduated with a
   B.S. in Engineering, specializing in electrical engineering and
   computer science. Oh, and while he was at Princeton, he also served as
   the President of the Princeton chapter of the Students for the
   Exploration and Development of Space. Now that’s some scary nerd stuff.
   And don’t believe for a minute that Larry Ellison, the manly-man CEO at
   Oracle isn’t a nerd – the guy was a computer design specialist, even
   though he never graduated from college.

   The list goes on and on. There are exceptions of course. HP’s Meg
   Whitman, for example, grew up in the world of marketing and brand
   management. Steve Ballmer took the business route too. But for the most
   part it’s the nerds who rule technology companies. Scientists.
   Engineers. Biologists. And if they have a little bit of business sense
   then all the better.

   Because here’s the truth: business is not that tough to learn. I know
   this because I’m running a profitable little business and I’m not
   1/1000 as smart as any of the people I’ve mentioned above. You buy low
   and you sell higher. You keep your overhead under control. You figure
   out a simple return on investment. You don’t put all your eggs in one
   basket. The typical marketing, accounting or management degree that
   takes the average student four years to complete at state college would
   take a smart nerd half the amount of time. It’s just math. In fact, for
   the most part business is pretty simple math. Especially when you
   compare it to the math and logic the nerds do in their engineering,
   physics and computer science programs.

   If you run a technology company you will do better if you are a nerd.
   If you are investing in a technology company you will have more chance
   of success if a nerd is leading it. I recently asked Sean Flynn, a
   partner at Shasta Ventures about Swipely, one of their investments.

   Swipely, named by Forbes as "One of America's Most Promising Companies"
   is aiming to enable local merchants to inexpensively capture and
   analyze data in a way once reserved only for big businesses. The Rhode
   Island company is run by Angus Davis, an already successful
   entrepreneur who holds seven (issued and pending) patents and who
   worked his way up in the world developing websites and products for
   companies like Netscape. I’ve never met or spoken to Davis, but he also
   seems kind of nerdy to me. And Flynn loves that.  “It’s not just the
   idea for a company,” Flynn told me. “It’s the person running the
   company. We love Angus and that’s why we invested.” Another victory for
   another nerd.

   Successful technology companies are generally run by nerds. I could
   argue that nerds, being more technical, also have more vision and
   relevance in a more technical world. And that is true. But more
   importantly if you are a nerd running a company than you will be
   respected by the other nerds who just want to do nerdy things and are
   happy to let you be the boss because you’re a nerd like them. You will
   be able to speak their language and understand their problems. You will
   know better how to manage their time and create expectations. You can
   talk about Star Trek and Comic-Con and pick apart Myth Busters.

   You can always hire business people to do your accounting and finance.
   You can always find salesmen to sell your products (and those nerds
   with a smidgen of communication skills excel better there too). People
   who get technical degrees in college and can develop the skills to
   socialize, speak to groups and better understand other people are the
   ones who often emerge as leaders of tech companies. Of course, they
   will always be nerds at heart. Just ask Nadella. Cricket? Ugh.

   Besides Forbes, Gene Marks writes daily for The New York Times and
   weekly for Inc.com.
   Gene Marks
   Gene Marks

     * Editorial Standards
     * Print
     * Reprints & Permissions

   ____________________ (BUTTON)
