   #Digital Media Services UK Limited » Feed Digital Media Services UK
   Limited » Comments Feed Digital Media Services UK Limited » Joe Blogs:
   Nerds still aren’t cool and here’s why… Comments Feed alternate
   alternate

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MMSW39

   [dms-logo.png] (BUTTON)
     * Home
     * Services
     * Platforms
     * News
     * Work
     * People
     * Careers
     * Contact

News

Joe Blogs: Nerds still aren’t cool and here’s why…

   You are a nerd. You nerd.

   That used to be a serious, serious burn but these days it’s something
   of a compliment. As someone who grew up watching 90s teen movies (where
   it was always the goal to become ‘cool’), I must admit this is still a
   bit weird to me. Don’t get me wrong, it’s great that nerdiness isn’t
   derided in the way it used to be and brains are celebrated as much as
   brawn. I just can’t figure out why it suddenly changed. I googled, ‘why
   are nerds cool now?’ and all I found was self-confessed nerds
   congratulating themselves for the achievements of Steve Jobs. There was
   a lot of, ‘we are the best, we are clever, we get the best jobs, girls
   think we’re cool,’ etc. It all got a bit presidential to be honest, so
   I moved on and had a think for myself…

   OK, so what am I talking about? Well, with all the news and
   announcements from San Diego Comic-Con (SDCC) taking over the internet,
   it’s got us thinking that the definition of ‘nerd’ appears to have
   changed. Or is it the definition of ‘cool’ that’s changed? Let’s have a
   look at some of the ‘nerdy’ behaviour penetrating the mainstream and
   see if we can’t figure this one out.

Geeky Shows and Films Have Become ‘Culture’

   In at number one, it’s movies and TV. More people now have a real
   answer to ‘Kirk or Picard?’ than ‘cats or dogs?’ and content binge
   culture has taken us from consuming relatively believable content to
   screaming for mind riles and giant, monster, explosion pandas. The
   clearest representation of this can be seen through the transition of
   the Marvel comic book movies, which I’ve spoken about before. In Media
   Intelligence, we’ve archived and categorised tens of thousands of media
   mentions surrounding them, and it’s literally been our job to dig in
   and analyse the progress of the franchise through the years… to be
   nerds. I mean, look at Thor. He looks like Walt Disney himself drew him
   and then encased him in muscle, but he still teaches Natalie Portman
   (who happens to be the black swan!) lessons about the universe that
   equate science to magic. They’re literally aligning brains, beauty and
   badassary as one and the same thing. Similarly, Black Panther; the
   wise, royal, performance-enhancing drug-user of a super-athlete also
   has intricate knowledge of a science unknown to all other top
   physicists. And come on, the most nerdy, brainy,
   awkward-around-other-humans avenger of the lot is Bruce Banner and he
   also happens to be the biggest and most powerful. They pulled off a
   mean tick here, they’ve made the nerds and the cool kids want to be the
   same characters. They identify with the same people…imagine that.

Technology Has Levelled The Playing Field For Dweebs

   Not only that, cool kids and nerds are getting more similar interests.
   When I was a kid, computer games were considered to be ‘children’s
   toys’ and adults that played them fell into two categories; ‘supportive
   parents’ and ‘losers’. Not anymore! Today, gaming is a $140 billion a
   year industry that seriously caters to all ages and cultures… and it’s
   called ‘gaming’, it’s got a name now, it’s gone legit. The recent story
   about Keanu Reeves featuring in the game, Cyberpunk 2077, definitely
   kept us busy at DMS; especially since Reeves was instrumental in
   beginning the ‘nerds are cool’ movement when he played Neo in The
   Matrix. And with more powerful applications of the internet, gamers can
   play against people from all over the world in a safe environment. So,
   for instance, playing some iteration of Call of Duty online allows
   people to compete in a physically violent way without any actual
   danger. In fact, it takes genetics out of the equation altogether and
   the only thing that really matters is your ability to play the game/how
   many hours you’ve stayed up playing it instead of sleeping just to get
   good enough. It’s a nerd’s dream because it doesn’t matter how big your
   opponent is in real life, or how confident they are, how utterly
   desired they are by everyone they meet and how easy they find it to
   connect with others physically, you still shot them in the head in that
   game that time. So you win.

Dorks Are Getting Fit!

   The physical thing has taken a bit of a mad turn in recent years,
   though! There’s a network of caves near where I grew up and every
   weekend, groups of kids would go there dressed as elves and goblins and
   stuff to ‘do battle’ with foam swords. kind of like a dungeons and
   dragons thing. I knew some of these kids and just remember them as the
   nice crowd. That being said, their behaviour was widely considered to
   be pretty tragic and really, to dress up in any kind of costume outside
   of the usual fancy dress fodder and/or overly sexualised Halloween
   attire was as good as tapping the biggest kid in the playground on the
   shoulder and asking them to scar you for life. Then cosplay became a
   thing. Almost over-night, comic book and sci-fi conventions transformed
   from the last bastion of society for geeky teenagers to express
   themselves in public and became a local event at which you could see
   beautiful specimens of human beings bringing these beloved, heroic
   characters to life. I saw a group of guys dressed as the avengers… and
   they all had pecs! And there were groups of female super heroes that
   made all the ironic cowboy hats and leg warmers form fresher’s week
   look like a plumber’s overalls. There’s a sweet spot that’s been here.
   The creativity of the nerd has met the cool kids’ preoccupation with
   appearances and created something that celebrates them both. So, does
   that mean that nerds are now hitting the gym? Or are gym bods with
   jacked up muscles starting to get massively in with Frodo and the gang?

   Actually, it’s both! Like Cate Blanchet and Benjamin Button, we’ve all
   met in the middle. Nerds are becoming like the cool kids and the cool
   kids are becoming like the nerds. The process is well underway of
   homogenising any of the previously conceived ideas of ‘coolness’ or
   ‘nerdiness’, which means… NERDS DON’T EXIST ANYMORE! Nerds can’t be
   cool because they’ve ceased to be… they’ve eaten themselves! We’ve ALL
   eaten ourselves! Because, if everyone is cool, then no one is and if
   everyone is a nerd, no one is, right? Or are we all just posers? But,
   if everyone is a ‘poser’, no one is, which means we all must be legit.
   But if everyone is ‘legit’ then no one is… Hmmm, i’m stuck in a loop.
   Does this mean we can all drop the labels and just be ourselves now?
   That’s a scary thought; I’ll just be myself then. OK, who am I? How do
   I feel? What do I think? Am I enough? Does anyone care…Whoops, i got
   there a bit sharpish. Quick, someone give me another pigeonhole! It’s
   alright really, we’ve got the new Picard trailer to watch. if anyone
   needs me, I’ll be in the comments section.

22nd July 2019

IMAGE COPYRIGHTS: IMAGE COPYRIGHTS BELONG TO THE RELEVANT STUDIOS. THIS
ARTICLE: STAR TREK GENERATIONS – PARAMOUNT 1994, THOR – DISNEY STUDIOS 2011,
BLACK PANTHER – DISNEY STUDIOS 2018, AVENGERS: AGE OF ULTRON – DISNEY STUDIOS
2015, CYBERPUNK 2077 – CD PROJEKT 2020, CALL OF DUTY: BLACK OPS III –
ACTIVISION 2012, SDCC 2019 – goldenglobes.com 2019, SDCC 2019 – marvel.com
2019.

   Like this article and want to read more? Check out some of our other
   Joe Blogs articles below:

   Joe Blogs: Tarantino – His split personalities have split personalities

   Joe Blogs: Why do we care about biopics?

   Joe Blogs: Avengers Endgame – It couldn’t possibly live up to all this
   hype…could it?

   Go back

   Digital Media Services UK Limited

   DMS

   Shand House, 14-20 Shand Street, London Bridge, SE1 2ES

   e: info@dmsukltd.com    |    t: (+44) 203 750 5150
   AKA CP

   © 2022 Digital Media Services UK Limited | Terms and Conditions |
   Privacy Policy | By using this website, you agree to our Cookie Policy
